Acute airway obstruction caused by bronchial secretion is\nnot uncommon in surgical patients, especially child with URI\nhistory. This is related to the physiologic changes caused by\nthe general anesthesia, especially with inhalation anesthetics. 1)\nEndotracheal tube obstruction causes serious complications, in-\ncluding cardiovascular instability, pneumothorax and pulmonary\n2) So early detection of intraoperative airway events with\nedema.\nmonitoring devices including end-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2)\nmeasurement is essential to prevent further complications. This\nreport describe a case of complete endotracheal obstruction\nwith purulent secretion developed abruptly following endotracheal intubation for myringotomy surgery in a child, which\nwas successfully treated with immediate exchange of endotra-\ncheal tube without any complication.\n\n# CASE REPORT\n\nA 4 year-old, healthy fasted male weighing 13.5 kg was sc-\nheduled for a myringotomy and plastic surgery for velophary-\nngeal insufficiency. We got a recent URI history of him with\nmild symptom from his mother but his lungs were noted to be\nclear to auscultation in the preoperative visiting and again just\nprior to induction. The result of pediatric consultation was that\nhe was a well baby without any URI symptom. Premedication\nwas performed with atropine sulfate 0.3 mg intramuscularly 30\nminutes preoperatively. Induction was with ketamine 27 mg\nand rocuronium 8 mg IV. After 2 minutes mask ventilation,\nendotracheal intubation was performed with a 4.5 mm reinfor-\nced endotracheal tube (Safety-Flex TM\n(Silicone) 4.5 oral, Mal-\nlinckrodt, Ireland). Anesthetic maintenance was with enflurane\n1.0 vol% in O2 50% and N2O 50%. Thirty minutes after in-\nduction, at the point of ending of myringotomy, signs of\npartial endotracheal obstruction were observed including low\ntidal volume under same airway pressure and elevated end-tidal\nCO2 to 60 mmHg for several minutes following abrupt absence\nof end-tidal CO2. Mechanical ventilation was switched to ma-\nnual ventilation and passage of a suction catheter was tried\nimmediately but it was difficult. Decreased breathing sound\nand wheezing were noted on both lung field with a precordial\nstethoscope and curve of ETCO2 by capnography was not de-\ntected. Endotracheal tube was changed to 4.5 mm RAE polye-\nthylene tube (RAETM Oral, 4.5, Mallinckrodt, Ireland) and re-\nmoved reinforced tube showed complete obstruction of distal\nlumen due to impaction of mucoid secretion (Fig. 1, 2). After exchange of the tube, there was no further problems in\nventilation. The patient hemodynamically had been stable and\noxygen saturation by pulse oxymetry was maintained 95% -\n100% during all of this procedure. But plastic surgeon decided\nnot to perform the operation that day after having a discussion\nwith parents. The patient's trachea was extubated in the\nrecovery room and was fully awaked within 30 minutes. He\nwas discharged the next day without any remarkable posto-\nperative course.\n\nDISCUSSION\n\nOcclusion of the endotracheal tube is one of the major\nhazards of endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation.\nThere are many potential causes of endotracheal tube occlusion\nand can be divided into cuff herniation, obstruction by mucus,\nblood clot or foreign body, and malposition of tube.\n\nThe signs of obstruction are decreased breathing sound,\nwheezing, increased inspiratory pressure and decreased tidal\nvolume. If this situation had occurred just after induction or\nwhile awaking the patient, we would have thought it bron-\nchospasm under light anesthesia. And abruptly developed com-\nplete endotracheal obstruction is not common. In this case, it\noccurred 30 minutes after induction and the end of myrin-\ngotomy abruptly. The signs of endotracheal tube obstruction\ncan also detected by (1) activation of the high-pressure alarm\n(2) difficulty ventilating by using a bag-valve-mask device (3)\nrapid decrease of end-tidal CO2 (4) oxygen desaturation that\nmay have lagged behind the decrease of end-tidal CO2 and ⑤\nthe inability to advance a catheter down the endotracheal\ntube. 3) In this case, we could also detect easily the potentially\ncatastrophic complete endotracheal obstruction with the aid of\nend-tidal CO2 monitoring.\n\nChildren with active and recent URIs (within 4 weeks) are\nat increased risk for adverse respiratory events, particulary if\nthey have a history of reactive airway disease, require surgery\ninvolving the airway, have a history of prematurity, are ex-\nposed to environmental tobacco smoke, have nasal congestion\nor copious secretions, or require placement of an ETT.4) Pati-\nents who were asymptomatic but had a recent history of an\nURI even showed a significantly increased risk for the deve-\nMoreover the ETT\nlopment of intraoperative complications. 5)\nhas been associated with an 11-fold increase in respiratory\ncomplications in anesthetized child with a URI because of the\npresence of increased secretions and airway hyperreactivity.9)\nSo anesthetic management is aimed at reducing stimulation of\na potentially irritable airway by using face mask and LMA7) if\npossible. But we also had a report that the use of the LMA\nwere identified as independent factor associated with an in-\nIn this case, we had to\ncreased risk of airway complications. 8)\nuse an ETT because oral plastic surgery was scheduled and\nthe child's URI symptoms subsided several days before.\n\nWe used armored tube with built-in spiral wire (ID 4.5 mm)\nto minimize the opportunity of collapse or kinking during oral\nsurgery instead of standard polyvinyl chloride tube. Usually the\ninternal diameter of the armored tube is smaller than that of\nstandard polyvinyl tube of the same sized external diameter\nbecause the wall of armored tube is thicker. Airway obs-\ntruction is apt to occur in child with small caliber ETT, so it\nis more easily happened with armored tube than with standard\npolyvinyl tube. And polyethylene tube have two Murphy eyes.\nThis may have provided better ventilation in case there is thin\nmucus at the tip of tube and to the left lung with a very distally placed tracheal tube. This patient had a mucus plug\nabout over 1 cm from the tip of the tube, where Murphy eyes\nin polyethylene tube are located (Fig. 1, 2). Diagnosing ETT\nobstruction may be more difficult in a small diameter nasal\nRAE tube, because its preformed shape may inhibit a suction\ncatheter to pass freely.\n\nSeveral factors can place surgical patients at risk for develo-\nping mucous impaction. Dehydration and low inspired humidity\ncan increase the viscosity of secretions leading to inspissation\nand a reduction in mucociliary flow. 9) Mucociliary flow decrea-\nses with reduction in body or mucosal temperature that can\n10) In addition, commonly\noccur during surgery and anesthesia.\nused drugs such as atropine may cause mucus to become vis-\ncid and impair mucous transport. Furthermore, inhalation drugs\nmay reversibly depress ciliary activity and decrease mucous\nIn this case, the combination of atropine\nflow at usual doses. 1)\npremedication in conjunction with the small caliber of the\npediatric armored tube placed the child with a recent URI his-\ntory at especially high risk for thick mucoid impaction.\n\nAlthough humidification and warming of inspired gases, and\nmaintaining adequate hydration is important to prevent the risk\nof mucoid impaction, the most important preventive measure\nthat can be taken is to avoid anesthesia in children with URIs.\nBut the decisions to proceed with elective surgery be\nindividualized with careful consideration for the severity of\npresenting symptoms. Early detection and treatments including\nstop the operation procedure, the exchange of tube and the\nfiberoptic removal of secretion and mask ventilation are critical\nto prevent the fatal consequences of tube obstruction if it once\noccurred. 11)\n\nAlthough endotracheal obstruction may be life-threatening,\nespecially in pediatric patients, optimising initial management\ncan result in a favourable clinical outcome with no significant\nsequelae.