INTRODUCTION\n\nBIS (bispectral index) is used to monitor hypnosis and the depth of general anesthesia. Initially developed from work\nwith the adult electroencephalogram (EEG), BIS has recently\nbeen shown to correlate with anesthetic concentration in children. 4-6)\nThe electrocardiogram (ECG), a basic index monitored during\nanesthesia, and heart rate variability (HRV), obtained from it,\n7,8)\nare controlled by the brain. A previous study showed coupling\n9)\nbetween heart rate changes and EEG bursts in preterm,\nsuggesting that EEG changes may be related to some aspects\nof heart rate changes.\n\nOur hypothesis is that there may be coupling between EEG\nand ECG changes during anesthesia, and thus between BIS\nand the ECG. Thus some measures of HRV may be usable as\nan alternative to BIS as a monitor of anesthetic depth.\n\nMATERIALS AND METHODS \n\nThis study was approved by the Committee of Clinical\nInvestigation of our institution. We recruited 33 patients, aged\n2- 12 years, undergoing orthopedic surgery. Children on anti-\nconvulsants, antihypertensives, beta blockers or other medication\naffecting the brain or cardiovascular system were excluded.\nPatients arrived at the operating room unpremedicated, after\nfasting according to ASA guidelines. Electrocardiograph (ECG),\nSpO2 and noninvasive blood pressure (NIBP) (Solar 8000M, GE,\nMilwaukee, WI, USA) were monitored. After induction with\nthiopental (5 mg/kg), BIS (Aspect Medical systems, Newton,\nMA) and lead 2 ECG (MP-100A, Biopac Inc, Santa Barbara,\nCA) were monitored and connected to a personal computer to\nobtain the data. After disappearance of the eye-lash reflex,\npatients were ventilated with 8% sevoflurane in 100% oxygen\nand given rocuronium 0.6 mg/kg before tracheal intubation.\nThey were then ventilated with 2.5 vol% of sevoflurane, in\n35% oxygen in air, at a tidal volume of 7 ml/kg after intubation. Respiratory rate was adjusted to maintain an\nend-tidal CO2 of 35 -40 mmHg. After inspired and expired\nend tidal sevoflurane concentrations had been steady at 2.5\nvol% for more than 10 minutes during surgery, the data were\nobtained from ECG and BIS for 15 minutes and stored in the\npersonal computer. At 1.0 vol% of sevoflurane, the data were\nagain collected.\n\nData Preprocessing\n\nAll ECG data were reviewed by visual inspection, and\nsegments with signal loss, significant noise, or the presence of\natrial or ventricular extrasystoles discarded. R peak was determined\nRR\nby the algorithm described by Pan and Tompkins. 10)\nintervals (RRI) were tested for outliers (HR < 30 or > 200 beats/\nmin), which were removed. RRI data were linearly interpolated\nat 1000 Hz to construct a real-time series of RRIs, and then\nre-sampled at 2 Hz, and the resulting 1800 points (15 min of\ndata) were used to calculate HRV indices. All data processing,\nincluding visual inspection, spectral analysis and Hurst analysis,\nwas conducted using Matlab 7.0.1 (Mathwork Inc., MA, USA).\nPower spectral analysis (PSA)11) was performed with ECGs at\nboth concentrations of sevoflurane. Approximate entropy (ApEn)12)\nand layered behavior indices 13) such as maximum layered behavior\nindex (MaxLI) and mean layered behavior index (MeanLI)\n(Layered behavior indices mean that the tendency of a certain\nstatus) were also calculated.\n\nStatistical Methods\n\nPearson's coefficient of correlation (R) was used to find the\nrelationship between mean BIS and its indices at different\nconcentrations of sevoflurane. P < 0.05 was considered significant.\nAll statistical analyses were conducted using SPSS 12.0 (SPSS\nInc., Chicago, IL, USA).\n\nRESULTS\n\nThirty one patients, mean age 4.7 (±1.9) years, completed\nthe study. Mean body weight was 19.0 (±5.9) kg and mean\nheight was 105.5 (±15.1) cm. Mean systolic/diastolic blood\npressure with sevoflurane 2.5 vol% was 102/52 mmHg (101.7 土\n18.3 mmHg/52.4 土 11.4 mmHg), and with sevoflurane 1.0%,\n108/58 mmHg (108.3 土 17.0 mmHg/58.5 土 12.5 mmHg).\nMaxLI and MeanLI were positively correlated to BIS (R = 0.51,\nP = 0.007, R = 0.40, P = 0.037, respectively) (Fig. 1). However,\nlow-frequency power (LFP) (R = 0.02, P = 0.92), high-frequency\npower (HFP) (R = -0.08, P = 0.70) and ApEn (R = 0.16, P =0.44) were not correlated (Table 1). \n\nTable 1. Correlation between Indices of Analyzing of Heart Rate and BIS\n\n|  | Changes in different concentration of sevoflurane | Pearson coefficient |\n| --- | --- | --- |\n| Total power (msec2) | 4,374.3 土 1,992.3 | -0.002 (0.99) |\n| Low-frequency power (msec2) | 2.8 土 13.7 | 0.021 (0.92) |\n| High-frequency power (msec2) | 0.32 土 40.1 | - 0.078 (0.70) |\n| Approximate entropy | 0.14 土 2.1 | 0.16 (0.43) |\n| Maximal layered index | 20.4 土 183.3 | 0.51 (0.007)* |\n| Mean layered index | 12.6 土 50.1 | 0.41 (0.037)* |\n\n\nValues are mean 土 SD. *: P < 0.05.\n\nDISCUSSION\n\nWe have shown a positive relationship between layered\nbehavior ECG indices and BIS. In a previous study, BIS could\ndistinguish between the awake and anaesthetized states better\nthan other indices; HRV was less reliable than any EEG-based\n14) Although BIS did not predict the depth of anesthesia,\nindex.\na global inverse correlation between it and depth of anesthesia\nin whom\nhas been found in several studies in children, 15,16)\nchanges of BIS at different concentrations of sevoflurane\ncorrelated with changes in layered behavior indices. These\nindices may thus possibly prove to be an alternative to BIS\nfor monitoring depth of anesthesia in children.\n\nHRV changed significantly from the awake to the unconscious\n17) Short-term HRV indices can distinguish the awake from the anesthetic state in adults, suggesting that HRV may\nbe applicable in monitoring anesthetic depth. 18)\nAnother study,\nwhich showed changes in fractal characteristics of heart rate\nvariability during anesthesia, suggested that HRV analysis\ncould be used to monitor the depth of anesthesia by detrended\nfluctuation analysis. 19)\nWe found that as anesthesia was deepened,\nBIS and layered behavior indices both decreased.\n\nAnalysis of ECG data with PSA and ApEn showed no\ncorrelation with changes in BIS, although HRV changed\nbetween the awake and unconscious states; PSA or ApEn\ncould not distinguish between the two different levels of\nanesthesia in our study. ApEn means the flexibility of heart\nrate control. Therefore the larger ApEn means the more\nflexible heart rate control. The new indices used in this study\nwere thus superior to older ones such as LFP or HFP.\nHowever, a limitation of using these new indices is that they\nrequire a longer period of ECG data collection than BIS for\nanalysis.\n\nIn conclusion, as the level of consciousness decreases during\ngeneral anesthesia, heart rate shows a decreased layered\nbehavior. Indices such as maximum and mean layered indices\nwere positively correlated with BIS, suggesting a possible new\napproach to monitoring anesthetic depth in children.