INTRODUCTION\n\nPostoperative vomiting (POV) is one of the most common\nand serious complications in pediatric surgical patients. The\nimportance ofPOV in children has been emphasized because\nit is an important cause of morbidity in children [1]. Severe\nPOV is associated, not only with physical complications, such\n\nas dehydration, electrolyte abnormalities, wound disruption,\nbleeding, or aspiration pneumonia, but also with delayed\nhospital discharge, the increased use of medical resources,\nincreased health care costs, and decreased satisfaction [2].\nMost of all, POV is a very unpleasant experience.\n\nStrabismus surgery is an independent risk factor for POV in\npediatric surgery [2-4]. Numerous efforts have been expend-ed to decrease POV associated with pediatric surgery accord-\ning to their physiology and risk factors [1,2]. Many trials have\nbeen conducted to decrease POV by regulating anesthetic\nfactors, such as premedications, selecting anesthetic agents,\ndecreasing opioids, regulating intravenous fluids, and ad-\nministering acupuncture or antiemetics [1,2]. However, other\nfactors, such as gastric distension have been understudied.\n\nAlthough controversial [5], gastric decompression (GD) has\nbeen shown to reduce POV after surgery [6]. Reducing gastric\nvolume can decrease POV of gastrointestinal origin [7]. How-\never, few studies have investigated the effect of GD on POV\nin pediatric patients. Children can be more susceptible to\nincreased gastric volume during mask ventilation than adults\nbecause ofanatomic differences [8].\n\nThus, we hypothesized, even though gentle mask ventila-\ntion during anesthesia induction can increase the gastric\nvolume in children, decreasing gastric volume by GD could\neffectively reduce POV after pediatric strabismus surgery,\nwhich is one of the highest risk factors for POV (incidence up\nto 87%) [4]. We conducted the study to evaluate the effect of\nGD on the prevention of POV after pediatric strabismus sur-\ngery.\n\nMATERIALS AND METHODS\n\nThis prospective, randomized, controlled, double-blinded,\n\nFig. 1. Cohort flow chart. A total of 60\npediatric patients (American Society\nof Anesthesiologists physical status\nclass I-II, aged one to 10 years) were\nrandomly allocated into two groups. Pa-\ntients in Group D (n = 30) received gas-\ntric decompression after endotracheal\nintubation and patients in Group C (n =\n30) did not. At the end of the surgery,\npostoperative vomiting was assessed\nduring anesthesia emergence (after\nextubation) and in the postanesthetic\ncare unit (30 min and 60 min) by a\nphysician who did not participate in the\nanesthesia.\n\nparallel study was approved by the Institutional Review\nBoard of University Hospital (no. 2015-11-002). A total of 60\npediatric patients, aged one to 10 years, scheduled for elective\nstrabismus surgery at a single center were enrolled between\nFebruary 1, 2016 and October 31, 2018 (Fig. 1). Patients with\nthe following conditions were excluded: American Society of\nAnesthesiologists physical status class > III; history of previ-\nous POV; congenital diseases, such as hydrocephalus, tra-\ncheoesophageal fistula, or congenital heart disease; history\nof upper respiratory tract infection within two weeks; and\nrespiratory disease, such as asthma. Written informed con-\nsent was obtained from the parents of all patients after a full\nexplanation of the study. Patient characteristics, such as age,\ngender, height, weight, body mass index, American Society of\nAnesthesiologists physical status class, and duration of sur-\ngery, were assessed during the study.\n\nThe patients were randomly allocated to two groups us-\ning a random number table created by the computer. The\npatients in Group D (n = 30) received GD immediately after\nendotracheal intubation and the patients in Group C (n =\n30) did not receive GD and acted as controls for the study.\nBoth patients and investigators who assessed the POV were\nblinded to the allocation sequence.\n\nPremedications were not administered to any patients.\nUpon arrival at the operating room, basal monitors, such as\nan electrocardiogram, pulse oximeter for oxygen saturation(SpO2), non-invasive arterial pressure, and a neuromuscu-\nlar transmission sensor (888418 M-NMT MechanoSensor,\nDatex-Ohmeda Inc., Finland) were placed. After cleaning\nthe skin on the volar side of the wrist, surface electrodes were\nattached over the area of the ulnar nerve and sensors were\nplaced on the index finger and thumb.\n\nAnesthesia was induced and maintained by two physicians\ntrained for more than three years. After administration of 5\nmg/kg thiopental sodium, mask ventilation was performed\nwith 100% O2 (3 L/min) plus sevoflurane 3 vol%. During face\nmask ventilation, the adjustable pressure limiting valve was\ncontrolled to maintain the inspiratory airway pressure below\n20 cmH2O. Manual mask ventilation was carefully performed\nto maintain the tidal volume measured on the volumeter at\n8 ml/kg and to maintain the end-tidal CO2 between 35-40\nmmHg.\n\nNeuromuscular monitoring was started with an automatic\nsearch of stimulus current for the maximal response of the\nadductor pollicis muscle, which began with 10 mA stimulus\nand increased in steps of 5 mA. When the response was no\nlonger increased according to the increase in current, the\nsupramaximal current was set as the current, which was au-\ntomatically increased by 15% of the maximal current. If the\nsupramaximal current was not found, 70 mA was set as the\nsupramaximal current by the equipment and the supramaxi-\nmal current was adjusted at 50 mA. When the train-of-four\ncount became less than 1, intubation was performed with a\nRing-Adair-Elwin (RAE) uncuffed endotracheal tube. The\nsize of the RAE tube was selected using an age-based formula\n(age/4 + 4 or age/4 + 4.5) and the optimal tube size was con-\nfirmed by the air leakage test with a sustained inflation pres-\nsure of20 to 25 cmH2O [9].\n\nA computer-generated random number table was used\nto assign patients to either Group C or D. The physician was\ninformed of the group allocation by a nurse who was not part\nofthe investigating team just before the endotracheal intuba-\ntion. After the intubation, GD was performed immediately\non the Group D patients but no GD was performed on the\nGroup C patients. An 8 Fr nasogastric tube was carefully in-\nserted into the stomach ofthe Group D patients. The depth of\nthe gastric tube insertion was estimated by measuring from\nthe external landmarks of the nose to the earlobe and to the\nxiphoid process (NEX method) and was confirmed by the\naspiration of a small volume of gastric contents with a syringe\n\n[10]. The nasogastric tube was connected to the wall-vacuum\nto regulate the suction pressure and GD was done carefully\nand intermittently with gentle pressing on the abdomen and\nthe application of suction below 20 mmHg to avoid gastric\nerosion [11].\n\nMechanical ventilation with an initial tidal volume of 8 ml/\nkg was initiated and the tidal volume and frequency were ad-\njusted to maintain the end-tidal CO2 between 35-40 mmHg.\nAnesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane and a 50% O2-\nair mixture. The end-tidal concentration of sevoflurane was\nadjusted to maintain the vital signs within 20% of their base-\nline values during the maintenance of anesthesia. No opioid\nor additional dose ofneuromuscular blocking agent was used\nduring the surgery.\n\nAt the end ofthe surgery, the administration ofall anesthet-\nics was discontinued and reversal agents (pyridostigmine 0.25\nmg/kg with glycopyrrolate 0.01 mg/kg) were administered\nwhen the train-of-four ratio became more than 0.2. Extuba-\ntion was performed when the train-of-four ratio became\nmore than 0.9. The patients were transferred to the postanes-\nthetic care unit (PACU) after emergence.\n\nThe primary outcome was the incidence ofPOV. To main-\ntain study blindness, POV was assessed during the following\nthree time intervals of anesthesia emergence by another\nphysician who did not participate in the anesthesia: from the\nstart of anesthesia arousal to transport to the PACU, during\nfirst 30 min in the PACU, and from 30 to 60 min in the PACU.\nRisk scores for postoperative vomiting for children were as-\nsessed according to the Eberhart classification. The scores\nranged from 0 to 4 according to risk factors, such as age > 3\nyears, duration of surgery > 30 min, strabismus surgery, and\nhistory of POV [4]. Hemodynamic data, such as mean blood\npressure and heart rate, were assessed before the induction\n(baseline), 1 min after GD, 1 min after extubation, and 60 min\nafter extubation in the PACU.\n\nThe sample size was calculated using G*Power3 free soft-\nware (available at: http://www.psycho.uni-duesseldort.de/\nabteilungen/aap/gpower3). The effect size was 0.5, which\nwas a large effect size suggested by Cohen's conventional\ncriteria because there were no previous studies on POV after\nGD in pediatric strabismus surgery patients [12]. Using a =\n0.05 with a power of 80%, the total sample size was calculated\nto be 52. After assuming a 15% drop out rate, 30 patients were\nallocated to each group.\n\nStatistical analyses were performed using SPSS (IBM ver-\nsion 21, IBM Co., USA). The values are expressed as the\nmean (standard deviation) or the number of patients (%).\nNormality of distribution was assessed with the Kolmogorov-\nSmirnov test and all the data showed normal distribution.\nThe incidence ofPOV, the primary outcome ofthe study, was\ncompared between the groups using the chi-squared test.\nOdds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) were\nused to identify the correlations between GD and POV. Gen-\nder and American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status\nclass were analyzed by the chi-squared test. Age, risk score,\nweight, height, body mass index, and duration of surgery\nwere analyzed by t-tests. Hemodynamic changes were ana-\nlyzed by repeat measures two-way ANOVA and t-tests was\nused to analyze differences between the groups. Post-hoc\ntests were conducted with Turkey's honestly significant dif-\nference test. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.\n\nRESULTS\n\nA total of 60 patients were assessed for eligibility and en-\nrolled in the study. There were no significant differences in\n\nthe characteristic data, risk scores for postoperative vomiting,\nor the duration of surgery between the groups (Table 1. Patient Characteristics\n\n| Variable | Group C(n = 30) | Group D (n = 30) | P value |\n| --- | --- | --- | --- |\n| Age (yr) | 5.9 土 2.1 (5.11-6.11) | 6.2 ±2.4 (5.32-6.97) | 0.555 |\n| Age group |  |  | 1.000 |\n| < 3yr | 2(6.7) | 2(6.7) |  |\n| ≥3yr | 28 (93.3) | 28 (93.3) |  |\n| Risk score | 2.93 土 0.25 | 2.93 土 0.25 | 1.000 |\n| Gender (F/M) | 20/10 | 19/11 | 1.000 |\n| Height (cm) | 117.3 土 12.7 (112.87-121.68) | 117.7 土 15.8 (111.97-122.80) | 0.921 |\n| Weight (kg) | 23.5 土 6.2 (21.26-25.58) | 25.2 土 10.4 (21.53-28.84) | 0.446 |\n| Body mass index | 16.7 土 2.1 (16.00-17.48) | 17.3 土 3.2 (16.27-18.48) | 0.370 |\n| ASA PS class (I/II) | 30/0 | 29/1 | 1.000 |\n| Duration of surgery (min) | 54.1 土 18.0 (47.67-60.19) | 58.9 土 16.4 (52.77-64.16) | 0.291 |\n\n\nValues are presented as mean 土 SD (95% confidence interval) or number (%). Group C, without gastric decompression as a control; Group D, with\ngastric decompression; Risk score, assessed by Eberhart classification [4]. ASA PS: American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status.).\n\nThe incidence of POV differed during emergence (Table 2. The Incidence of Postoperative Vomiting\n\n| Time interval | Group C (n = 30) | Group D (n = 30) | P value | Odds ratio (95% confidence interval) |\n| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |\n| During emergence | 9 (30.0) | 1 (3.3) | 0.006 | 0.080 (0.009-0.685) |\n| During 30 min in the PACU | 2 (6.7) | 1 (4.3) | 1.000 | 0.483 (0.041-5.628) |\n| From 30 min to 60 min in the PACU | 0 (0) | 0 (0) | - | - |\n\n\nValues are presented as number (%). Group D, Group C, without gastric decompression as a control; Group D, with gastric decompression. POV: post-\noperative vomiting, PACU: postanesthetic care unit.\n\nwww.anesth-pain-med.org\n\n69\n\nKSPA\n\nAnesth Pain Med Vol. 15 No. 1).\nDuring anesthesia emergence, POV developed in only 3.3% of\nthe patients in Group D, while 30% of the patients developed\nPOV in Group C (P = 0.006). The odds ratio analysis showed\na lower incidence of POV in Group D (OR = 0.080; 95% CI:\n0.009-0.685) than in Group C during the emergence period.\nHowever, there were no significant differences in the inci-\ndence of POV between Group C and D in the PACU. There\nwere also no significant differences in the hemodynamic data\nassessed at various times (Table 3. Hemodynamic Changes over Time\n\n| Time interval | Time interval | Group C (n = 30) | Group D (n = 30) | P value |\n| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |\n| Mean blood pressure (mmHg) | Baseline (before induction) | 82.7 土 14.6 (77.46-87.47) | 79.9 土 10.5 (76.27-84.24) | 0.331 |\n| Mean blood pressure (mmHg) | 1 min after gastric decompression | 93.9 土 14.3 (88.73-98.79) | 97.2 土 17.8 (91.36-103.81) | 0.179 |\n| Mean blood pressure (mmHg) | 1 min after extubation | 97.2 土 15.1 (91.83-102.32) | 96.0± 15.3 (90.81-101.36) | 0.753 |\n| Mean blood pressure (mmHg) | PACU (30 min after extubation) | 80.6 土 10.9 (76.55-84.88) | 79.3 土 10.8 (75.72-83.15) | 0.700 |\n| Heart rate (beats/min) | Baseline (before induction) | 105.5 土 14.4 (100.70-111.20) | 109.0 土 23.2 (101.03-117.55) | 0.110 |\n| Heart rate (beats/min) | 1 min after gastric decompression | 120.2 土 12.8 (115.45- 124.93) | 123.1 土 14.7 (118.08-128.50) | 0.212 |\n| Heart rate (beats/min) | 1 min after extubation | 131.6 土 13.6 (125.92-136.68) | 129.1 土 19.9 (121.73-135.92) | 0.135 |\n| Heart rate (beats/min) | PACU (30 min after extubation) | 96.5 土 17.8 (90.42-102.97) | 105.7 土 21.1 (98.57-113.34) | 0.228 | 3).\n\n# DISCUSSION\n\nIn the current study, GD reduced the incidence of POV\nduring emergence (3.3 vs. 30.0% in control) in pediatric pa-\ntients undergoing strabismus surgery.\n\nPOV is a common complication after pediatric surgery and\ncan result in several types of complications. POV in children\nis an important cause of morbidity and a rational approach\nis needed to minimize this unpleasant complication [1].\n\nValues are presented as mean 土 SD (95% confidence interval). Group C, without gastric decompression as a control; Group D, with gastric decom-\npression. PACU: postanesthetic care unit.\n\nChildren also perceive postoperative nausea and vomiting as\ndistress and loathing as adults [13]. Although the physiology\nof emesis is a complicated response mediated by the emetic\ncenter ofthe brain in the lateral reticular formation ofthe me-\ndulla [2], no drug can completely prevent POV [13]. Thus, in-\ndiscriminate prophylaxis by antiemetic agents is unnecessary\nand identifying the risk factors for POV in pediatric patients\nand applying targeted prophylactic therapy has benefits [14].\n\nAccording to previous reports, the incidence of POV is\nabout 13 to 42% in all pediatric patients [2]. The known risk\nfactors of POV in pediatric patients include patient factors,\nsurgical factors, and anesthetic factors [1,2]. Patient factors,\nsuch as age, history of POV, and gender, and surgical factors,\nsuch as duration of surgery and type of surgery, are beyond\nthe anesthesiologist's control. However, the anesthesiolo-\ngist can prepare antiemetic prophylaxis by assessing those\nrisk factors. A study investigating the risk of POV in pediatric\npatients suggested four independent risk factors: duration of\nsurgery ≥ 30 min, age ≥ 3 years, strabismus surgery, and his-\ntory of POV (or familial history of postoperative nausea and\nvomiting) [4]. According to the Eberhart classification scoring\nsystem, the incidence of POV was 9, 10, 30, 55, and 70% for\nrisk factors scored as 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively [4].\n\nSome risk factors were controlled during the conduct of\nthe study. Patient factors were controlled by exclusion crite-\nria (history of POV) and randomization during enrollment.\nUnfortunately, we enrolled children under three years of age\ndue to the epidemiology of strabismus (surgery for congeni-\ntal strabismus is conducted before patients are three years\nold). However, there were only two patients aged under three\nyears in each group and there was no significant difference\nbetween the groups in the patient characteristics (history\nof POV, age, and female gender). In the surgical factors,\n\nthe duration of surgery in both groups was about one hour\nand there was no significant difference between the groups.\nWe also controlled anesthetic factors by avoiding opioid\nadministration during surgery. However, sevoflurane and\nanticholinergics were used for the maintenance of anesthesia\nand reversal of the neuromuscular blockade. As a result, the\npatients in the current study had the same high-risk factors\n(strabismus surgery, duration of surgery more than 30 min,\nage, and use of volatile anesthetics and anticholinergics) but\nthere are no significant differences between the groups. We\nassessed the risk scores for postoperative vomiting for chil-\ndren and the mean score of the patients of the current study\nwas 2.93. There was no difference in the risk scores between\nthe groups. According to the Eberhart classification scoring\nsystem, the predicted incidence of POV with a risk score 3 is\nabout 55% [4]. However, 30% of the patients who did not re-\nceive GD in the study showed POV.\n\nIn the current study, we tried GD as antiemetic prophylaxis\ninstead of using prophylactic antiemetics. We hypothesized\nthat gas inspired into the stomach during mask ventilation\ncould cause vomiting. Gastric distention can develop despite\ngentle face mask ventilation with inspiratory pressure below\nthe esophageal sphincter pressure (mean 30.6 mmHg) in\nchildren older than one year of age [15]. According to a study\nof Lee et al. [16], the median inspiratory pressure inducing\ngastric insufflation was 18 cmH2O in pediatric patients and\nthe authors suggested limiting the inspiratory pressure to less\nthan 12-14 cmH2O to minimize gastric insufflation. Another\nstudy by Lee et al. [17] showed that the incidence of gastric\ninsufflation was 48% after manual face mask ventilation with\na mean peak airway pressure of 16.1 cmH2O. Thus, the con-\nventional face mask ventilation that limited inspiratory pres-\nsure to less than 20 cmH2O used in this study should induce gastric distension.\n\nVagal neurocircuitry plays an important role in the provo-\ncation of nausea and vomiting. Nucleus tractus solitarius\n(NTS) is the recipient of direct or indirect sensory input from\nthe abdominal and thoracic vagus nerves, pharynx, trigemi-\nnal nerve, spinal tract, and cerebellum [18]. The NTS regu-\nlates the medullary reflexes in the generation of nausea and\nvomiting. Distention of the stomach increases activation of\nmechanosensitive vagal afferents and the distention-evoked\nvagal afferents encode noxious information and transmit\npainful stimuli to the NTS. Thus, gastric inflation during\nmask ventilation activates mechanoreceptors, sending affer-\nent signals via the vagus nerve, which may result in vomiting\n[18,19]. Therefore, there is a possibility that inspired gas into\nthe stomach during mask ventilation can evoke vomiting by\ngastric distension.\n\nA recent study showed that GD reduced the incidence\nand severity of POV in ear, nose, and throat (ENT) surgery\n[6]. Erkalp et al. [6] suggested that GD was a way to minimize\nPOV factors and the number of studies on prophylactic GD\nshould be increased in different surgeries because it can be\na viable alternative for pharmacological treatment for POV.\nThese suggestion agree with ourresults.\n\nIn contrast to our study, some previous studies have shown\nthat GD did not decrease POV [20] but increased the risk of\nPOV [21]. However, these previous studies were conducted\non adult populations, not on pediatric patients. The capac-\nity of the stomach in children is much smaller than that in\nadults [8]. Thus, even a small volume of inspired gas can be\nenough to generate a vomiting response. Still, there are only\ntwo studies on the effect of GD on POV after pediatric surgery\nand they concluded that GD did not decrease the incidence\nof POV [22,23]. However, those studies assessed POV after\ntonsillectomy, not strabismus surgery. Moreover, both stud-\nies used opioids, which is one of the highest risk factors for\nPOV during anesthesia. In contrast, our study was conducted\non patients undergoing strabismus surgery, which is an in-\ndependent risk factor for POV with an incidence higher than\nother surgeries [4] and opioids were not used during the\nsurgeries. These discrepancies would reveal the difference in\noutcomes following the use of GD as antiemetic prophylaxis.\n\nAlthough recent consensus guidelines for the management\nof postoperative nausea and vomiting suggested that routine\ngastric decompression is ineffective in decreasing POV in\n\nchildren, the conclusion may have been based on insufficient\nevidence [5]. However, prophylactic therapy targeted to the\nidentified risk factors of POV in pediatric patients is impor-\ntant [14]. An early review also suggested that gastric suction\nmay be a valuable method of reducing vomiting by gastroin-\ntestinal origin [7]. Regrettably, the number of studies on the\neffect of GD on POV is still much smaller than the number of\npharmacologic treatments. GD is an inexpensive and easy\nmethod to decrease POV in pediatric ENT surgery with few\ncomplications [6]. More well-controlled research on the ef-\nfect of GD on POV is required to confirm the effectiveness\nand increase the data on this technique.\n\nThere were several limitations to the current study. First,\nwe could not control all the risk factors of POV in the study\nprotocol. Using total intravenous anesthesia and sugam-\nmadex for the reversal of neuromuscular blockade would be\nbetter ways to control the risk factors of POV but the use of\npropofol and sugammadexin pediatric patients is not still ap-\nproved in Korea. However, we tried to maintain identical ex-\nposure to risk factors in both groups and there was no signifi-\ncant difference in the risk factors. Second, we only assessed\nearly vomiting for about an hour. Pediatric POV can last for\nabout a day, therefore, POV should be assessed at early (0-6\nh) and later (6-24h) postoperative periods [2]. Unfortunately,\nwe could not assess later POV because most of the patients\nwere discharged about four to six hours after surgery and this\ncould be an important limitation of the current study. Third,\nwe were unable to quantify the volume of the gastric con-\ntents. The amount of aspirated gastric content is associated\nwith the severity of POV [6]. However, we used wall-vacuum\nsuction to keep the pressure low (less than 20 mmHg) and\navoid gastric erosion. We also conducted GD immediately\nafter intubation and most of the gastric contents were only\ngases. Thus, we could not assess the amount of aspirated gas-\ntric content.\n\nIn conclusion, GD effectively reduced the incidence of\nPOV during anesthesia emergence in pediatric patients un-\ndergoing strabismus surgery. GD can be a simple method for\nPOV prophylaxis after pediatric strabismus surgery. Further\nresearch investigating the effectiveness of GD according to\ndifferent POV risk factors is needed.\n\nwww.anesth-pain-med.org\n\nKSPA\n\n71\n\nAnesth Pain Med Vol. 15 No. 1