Despite advancements in the care of extremely premature\nneonates, perioperative complications in this population\nremain. Neonatal respiratory distress syndrome (NRDS) is a\ncondition linked to prematurity, whereby surfactant-defi-\nciency impairs normal lung function and may lead to respi-\nratory failure.\n\nAnesthesiologists often participate in neonatal resuscita-\ntion, especially when their expertise in airway management\nis sought. Extremely premature neonates may be delivered\nin centers lacking pediatric anesthesia specialization. As\nsuch, anesthesiologists should familiarize themselves with\n\nthe unique challenges of caring for these patients. We pres-\nent a case of an extremely premature micropremie ( < 750 g)\nwith suspected NRDS requiring urgent airway surgery with\nneed for maintenance of spontaneous ventilation using to-\ntal intravenous anesthesia (TIVA). Written consent was pro-\nvided by the patient's mother.\n\nCASE REPORT\n\nA 1 day old, 560 g female, 23 weeks and 6 days gestation\ndeveloped labored breathing immediately after birth. Intu-bation was deemed necessary and the NICU team proceed-\ned with direct laryngoscopy. Despite a grade I Cormack Le-\nhane view with visualization ofthe endotracheal tube (ETT)\ntraversing the glottic inlet, three attempts yielded no\nend-tidal carbon dioxide (EtCO2) on capnography. After\nconfirming functional capnography equipment, video la-\nryngoscopy was tried. No supraglottic and glottic abnor-\nmalities were identified, and correct ETT placement was di-\nrectly visualized, however EtCO2 remained undetectable.\nThe NICU team did not comment on chest rise with positive\npressure or bilateral breath sounds on auscultation after in-\ntubation. The patient was extubated and temporized on na-\nsal BiPAP (Pinsp of 16 cmH2O, positive end expiratory pres-\n\nsure of 6 cmH2O and FiO2 of0.4) and transferred to our pe-\ndiatric hospital for urgent rigid bronchoscopy to evaluate\nfor tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF).\n\nTo facilitate bronchoscope insertion, we provided deep\nsedation while maintaining spontaneous ventilation. This\nwas challenging given the size of the patient. We accom-\nplished this by administering dexmedetomidine (diluted to\n1 mcg/ml) boluses incrementally, totaling 4 mcg/kg IV, in\naddition to a propofol (diluted to 2.5 mg/ml) infusion at 300\nmcg/kg/min. Bronchoscopy demonstrated an edematous\nepiglottis (Fig. 1. Bronchoscopic findings. (A) Edematous epiglottis. (B) Laceration at the esophageal introitus involving the arytenoids. (C, D) Mild\ntracheomalacia in the proximal and distal trachea, respectively.)(Fig. 1A), 2 lacerations on the posterior pharynge-\nal wall (Fig. 1B), and mild tracheomalacia (Fig. 1C, D), how-\never, no TEF was identified. Additionally, successful orogas-tric tube placement made esophageal atresia unlikely. The\ntrachea was then intubated using a Wisconsin 00 laryngo-\nscope with an uncuffed 2.5 mm ETT over a 2 mm telescope\nwith care taken to maintain tube depth at 7 cm. However,\nno chest-rise, bilateral breath sounds on auscultation or\nEtCO2 was observed with subsequent manual ventilation.\nWhen the inspiratory pressure applied during manual ven-\ntilation was increased to 40 cmH2O, lack of EtCO2 remained.\nThe patient was briefly turned into a lateral decubitus posi-\ntion with continued ventilation to rule out mass effect given\nthe lack of preoperative echocardiography, but this was to\nno avail. A suction catheter could not be passed down the\n2.5 mm ETT given its small size. After a min ofhigh peak in-\nspiratory pressure with shorter inspiratory times, a subtle\nincrease in chest-rise was observed and EtCO2 was detect-\ned. The procedure was complicated by a brief episode of se-\nvere hypoxemia (SpO2 37%) and bradycardia (HR 20) during\nbronchoscopy ( Chart Type: line\n|  | SP0237 | HR 20 |\n| --- | --- | --- |\n| item_01 | 0.5mL | 7.392mL |\n\n\nFig. 2. Anesthetic record during rigid bronchoscopy. The chart displays 5-minute intervals, administered medications, and recorded vital\nsigns. Black arrows indicate the SpO nadir (37%) and the lowest heart rate (20 bpm), both of which promptly returned to baseline.), for which epinephrine 1 mcg/kg was\ngiven. After stabilization, the patient was transferred to the\nNICU for further monitoring. During the patient's hospital\ncourse, a hemodynamically significant patent ductus arteri-\nosus (PDA) was identified by echocardiogram and con-\nfirmed by cardiac catheterization. The patient returned to\nthe operating room for thoracotomy and patent ductus ar-\nteriosus closure, which was uncomplicated.\n\nTo our knowledge, this is the first report of an extremely\npremature un-intubated micropremie requiring rigid bron-\nchoscopy with goals of maintaining spontaneous ventila-\ntion. Aspects of this case that make it uniquely challenging\ninclude the combination of: (i) a micropremie with failed\ndetection of EtCO2 on repeated successful intubations with\nsuspicion of TEF; (ii) need for an TIVA technique to main-\ntain spontaneous ventilation for airway surgery (iii) need\nfor positive pressure ventilation post intubation with no pri-\nor surfactant administration in an extremely premature ne-\nonate with suspected NRDS; (iv) no preoperative echocar-\ndiogram done given the urgency of the case. When confir-\nmation of successful endotracheal intubation using stan-\ndard clinical measures such as capnography was delayed, a\nbroad differential diagnosis was considered, including\ntechnical, anatomical, and pathophysiological causes. Ulti-\nmately, when higher peak inspiratory pressure was applied\nduring manual ventilation to overcome the intrinsic resis-\ntance of poorly compliant, surfactant-deficient alveoli,\nEtCO2 was detected, confirming successful intubation, and\nimplying effective ventilation. The presence of a hemody-\nnamically significant PDA could have contributed to the\nlack of EtCO2 post-intubation with high positive pressure ventilation, but the lack of chest rise, or presence ofbilateral\nbreath sounds on auscultation, make this sole cause less\nlikely.\n\nQuantitative capnography is a valuable and feasible mon-\nitoring modality, notwithstanding its limitations when ap-\nplied to the premature neonatal population [1]. The ab-\nsence of EtCO2 following intubation prompts consideration\nof a broad differential, including dysfunctional capnogra-\nphy equipment as well as various patient factors and condi-\ntions. Intubation in extremely premature neonates is tech-\nnically challenging owing to small maneuverability. Howev-\ner, ETT placement over a telescope ruled out esophageal in-\ntubation in our case. It is essential to consider TEF or asso-\nciated airway anomalies in the differential diagnosis oflack\nof EtCO2 following intubation of a neonate. In our case, this\nwas ruled out by performing urgent diagnostic bronchosco-\npy with successful orogastric tube placement [2]. Finally,\nconditions which may present as an inability to detect\nEtCO2, including severe bronchospasm, laryngospasm, ob-\nstructive shock, and cardiovascular collapse, were inconsis-\ntent with our clinical scenario. In our case, failure to detect\nEtCO2 implied ineffective ventilation secondary to reduced\nlung compliance and marked adhesive atelectasis in the\nsetting of surfactant deficiency.\n\nA common cause of respiratory failure in neonates is\nNRDS. Anesthesiologists should consider this condition\nand its implications on airway management and respiratory\nfunction when caring for premature neonates. The main-\nstay of treatment in NRDS is endotracheal surfactant re-\nplacement [3]. Endotracheal surfactant replacement (200\nmg/kg) is indicated when NRDS is suspected and has been\nshown to reduce morbidity and mortality [4]. This interven-\ntion may have optimized conditions for ventilation. Fur-\nthermore, we postulate that mechanistically, surfactant\ntherapy given upfront may have prevented the delay in de-\ntecting EtCO2 by mitigating the development of adhesive at-\nelectasis. Previous studies have shown that the difference\nbetween measured EtCO2 and PaCO2 decreases following\nendotracheal surfactant administration, which supports\nour hypothesis [5]. Surfactant administration may have also\nmitigated the need for high inspiratory pressures, and the\nresulting risk of barotrauma. From an institutional case, it\nwas atypical that intubation did not occur in the NICU prior\nto transfer, resulting in no pre-operative surfactant admin-\nistration.\n\nOur case overviews considerations for airway manage-\nment in micropremies with suspected NRDS and illustrates\n\nthe importance of multidisciplinary collaboration to pro-\nmote favorable outcomes for micropremies.