Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHC) deficiency is a\nrare mitochondrial disorder that primarily affects the brain\nand results in decreased adenosine triphosphate (ATP) pro-\nduction and energy deficiency [1]. It is caused by a genetic\nmutation that affects the activity of the PDHC enzyme,\nwhich plays a major role in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cy-\ncle. PDHC deficiency can lead to a variety of symptoms, in-\ncluding intrauterine growth retardation, developmental de-\nlay, hypotonia, intermittent ataxia, lactic acidosis, facial dys-\n\nmorphism, and cerebral atrophy [2]. The exact prevalence of\nPDHC deficiency remains unknown owing to its rarity [3]. To\nthe best of our knowledge, few cases related to surgery or\nanesthesia have been reported. This makes it challenging to\ndetermine the best anesthetic method for patients with\nPDHC deficiency. Therefore, further research and case re-\nports are required to establish appropriate anesthesia proto-\ncols and improve the perioperative outcomes of patients\nwith PDHC deficiency. Anesthesiologists need to raise awareness about PDHC deficiency and develop safe and ef-\nfective anesthetic plans. In this context, we present the anes-\nthetic management of a 24-month-old male patient with\nPDHC deficiency who underwent two consecutive surgeries\nunder general anesthesia. We aimed to provide insights into\nthe perioperative considerations in the management of pa-\ntients with PDHC deficiency patients undergoing surgery\nand anesthesia.\n\n# CASE REPORT\n\nThe current report was approved by the Institutional Re-\nview Board of our hospital, and the requirement for in-\nformed consent was waived (IRB no. 2303-013-125). A\n24-month-old male patient with a height of 87 cm and a\nweight of 10.5 kg presented to the emergency room due to\nrespiratory failure, mental decrease to a stupor state, sys-\ntemic cyanosis, and lactic acid increase up to 12.3 mM/L\n(normal range: 0.7-2.5 mM/L). Initial arterial blood gas\nanalysis result was pH 6.80, PaCO2 131 mmHg, PaO2 75\nmmHg. The child was previously diagnosed with pyruvate\ndehydrogenase E1-alpha deficiency two months after birth.\nAt the time of diagnosis, the child's laboratory result showed\nlactic acid 6.4 mM/L. There were no abnormal findings in\nthe parental phenotype, and the parental genetic test results\nwere normal. Therefore, the patient had a de novo patho-\ngenic variant of pyruvate dehydrogenase E1-alpha deficien-\ncy. He had a history of multiple admissions and discharges\nwith similar events. The main clinical features of the child\nwere lactic acidosis, mental decline, respiratory failure, and\nsystemic cyanosis. The child received mechanical ventila-\ntion and bicarbonate administration after hospitalization.\nDuring this hospitalization period, he presented with abdom-\ninal distension and ileus, and aggravation and remission con-\ntinued repeatedly. Computed tomography (CT) scan was\nconducted on the 30th day of hospitalization to determine the\ncause. CT scan revealed a pneumothorax, pneumomediasti-\nnum, pneumoperitoneum, and multiple air pockets in the\nheart, retroperitoneum, extraperitoneal space, scrotum, and\nrenal vessels (Fig. 1. Computed tomography image of the patient. Pneumothorax,\npneumomediastinum, and multiple air pockets in the heart are\ndetected.\n\nwww.anesth-pain-med.org\n\n271\n\nKSPA\n\nAnesth Pain Med Vol. 18 No. 3). It was assumed that the ventilator-in-\nduced lunginjury occurred due to the longperiod ofmechan-\nical ventilation, resulting in these conditions. There were no\nother events, such as an accidental air injection.\n\nBilateral chest tube insertion was performed before sur-\ngery and loop ileostomy was planned for an emergency sur-\ngery. The patient arrived in the operating room in an intu-\nbated state with an endotracheal tube (Inner diameter 4.5\n\nmm). Anesthesia was induced with 2.0 vol% sevoflurane and\n10 mg rocuronium. Invasive blood pressure monitoring was\nperformed via arterial cannulation of the left radial artery.\nCapnography, electrocardiography, pulse oximetry, core\ntemperature, anesthetic agent concentration, and airway\npressure was also monitored. Neuromuscular monitoring\nwas excluded because the appropriate monitoring size was\nunavailable. A circulating-water mattress was used to main-\ntain the patient's body temperature. Maintenance of anes-\nthesia was performed with 2.0 vol% sevoflurane, 0.02-0.03\nmg/h of intravenous remifentanil infusion. Mechanical ven-\ntilation was set at a tidal volume of 60 ml, respiratory rate 24\nper min, and FiO2 0.74 (2.0 L/min oxygen, 1.0 L/min air).\nOxygen saturation was maintained at 95% and end-tidal CO2\nat 32 mmHg. Balanced crystalloid solution was administered\nas an intravenous fluid. The vital signs of the patient main-\ntained stable throughout the surgery. The duration of the\noperation was 1 h and the anesthesia lasted for 1 h and 35\nmin. The patient was transferred to the surgical intensive\ncare unit while maintaining intubation. Preoperative venous\nblood gas analysis and postoperative arterial blood gas anal-\nysis data are presented in Table 1.(Table 1. ABGA Results of the Patient\n\n| ABGA | 1st operation | 1st operation | 2nd operation | 2nd operation |\n| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |\n| ABGA | Pre (VBGA) | Post | Pre | Post |\n| pH | 7.41 | 7.42 | 7.46 | 7.39 |\n| PaCO2 (mmHg) | 34 | 37 | 38 | 40 |\n| PaO2 (mmHg) | 42.8 | 125 | 127 | 79 |\n| Saturation (%) | 78 | 99 | 99 | 95 |\n| Base excess | -1.3 | -0.3 | 3.1 | -0.7 |\n| Lactic acid (mM/L) | 6.9 | 3 | 7.1 | 2.6 |\n| FiO2 | - | 0.35 | 0.35 | 0.35 |\n\n\nABGA: arterial blood gas analysis, VBGA: venous blood gas\nanalysis, -: not available.)\n\nFor the first week after the surgery, hyperbaric oxygen\ntherapy with FiO2 1.0 was conducted to resolve air pockets in\nthe heart. After terminating the hyperbaric oxygen therapy,the patient's ventilation was supported by the synchronized\nintermittent mandatory ventilation and continuous positive\nairway pressure modes. Two weeks after the first operation,\na second operation was conducted as an elective surgery for\ntracheostomy, ileostomy take-down, feeding gastrostomy\nand fundoplication. The patient intubated with an endotra-\ncheal tube (Inner diameter 4.5 mm) arrived in the operating\nroom and anesthesia was induced using 2.0 vol% sevoflu-\nrane and 8 mg rocuronium. Capnography, electrocardiogra-\nphy, pulse oximetry, core temperature, anesthetic agent\nconcentration, and airway pressure were monitored. Neuro-\nmuscular monitoring was not performed because of its un-\navailability. A circulating-water mattress and a Bair Hug-\ngerTM (3M Inc.) were used to maintain the body temperature\nof the patient. Maintenance of anesthesia was performed\nwith 2.0 vol% sevoflurane, and intravenous fluid using 5%\ndextrose water. Mechanical ventilation was set at a tidal vol-\nume of 60 ml, respiratory rate 28 per min, and FiO2 0.37-0.44\n(0.3-0.5 L/min oxygen, 1.2 L/min air). The oxygen saturation\nwas maintained at 96-100% and end-tidal CO2 at 35 mmHg.\nDue to the blood loss during the surgery, one packed red\nblood cell was also administered by a different intravenous\nroute. Dopamine infusion was used during the surgery to\nassist hemodynamics. After administering dopamine infu-\nsion, the patient's vital signs maintained stable. The surgery\nlasted for 4h and 50 min and the total anesthesia time was 5\nh and 35 min. The patient was transferred to the surgical in-\ntensive care unit with a tracheal cannula fixed at the trache-\nostomy site. The preoperative and postoperative arterial\nblood gas analysis data for the second operation are also\npresented in Table 1. Looking through the patient's two sur-\ngeries, lactic acidosis was apparentin the acute stage.\n\nThe patient received ventilator care in the surgical inten-\n\nsive care unit for three days and was switched to high-flow\ntracheal oxygenation. No events such as desaturation, tachy-\npnea, and dyspnea were observed. The patient was trans-\nferred to the general ward on the ninth postoperative day.\nAfter the preparation of home ventilation to support the pa-\ntient's breathing after discharge, the patient was finally dis-\ncharged on the 14th postoperative day.\n\nFollowing 14 months after surgery, the patient visited the\nemergency room four times. He continued to present with\nsymptoms such as lactic acidosis and mental decline, and\nwas repeatedly hospitalized with a diagnosis of pneumonia.\nAfter several days of conservative treatment, including me-\nchanical ventilation and bicarbonate administration, the pa-\ntient's symptoms were relieved and he was discharged from\nthe hospital. However, he was repeatedly readmitted until\nnow. Moreover, the dependence of the patient on home ven-\ntilation continues to increase so far.\n\n# DISCUSSION\n\nPDHC is a complex of five components that converts py-\nruvate into acetyl-CoA, which then enters the TCA cycle for\nATP production. The five components are E1, an a-keto acid\ndecarboxylase; E2, a dihydrolipoyl transacylase; E3, a dihy-\ndrolipoyl dehydrogenase; protein X, an extra lipoate-con-\ntaining protein; and pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase\n[1]. E1 enzyme contains subunits, which are divided into al-\npha and beta subunits. If any of these components are miss-\ning, the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA cannot pro-\nceed, resulting in the accumulation of pyruvate and lactate\n[4], leading to symptoms such as lactic acidemia and central\nnervous system abnormalities. The most common type is\npyruvate dehydrogenase E1-alpha deficiency, which ac-\ncounts for 76-85% of PDHC deficiencies. Approximately 60-\n63% ofpyruvate dehydrogenase E1-alpha deficiencies are de\nnovo pathogenic variants and the rest are exhibited in\nX-linked inheritance [2].\n\nThe presentation of this disease varies depending on the\nonset age. There are three main categories: neonatal onset,\ninfantile onset, and later childhood onset. The neonatal form\nhas the most severe enzyme deficiency and presents with le-\nthal lactic acidosis and structural brain anomalies such as\nagenesis of the corpus callosum. Patients with infantile onset\nmay present with chronic lactic acidosis, psychomotor retar-\ndation, and cystic lesions in the brainstem and in the basal\nganglia. Ifthe disease appears in late childhood, patients have\nless impaired enzyme activity and may present intermittent ataxia, paroxysmal dystonia, paroxysmal dyskinesia, and less\nacidosis [1]. Lactic acidosis can be aggravated by carbohy-\ndrate consumption. Therefore, implementing a ketogenic diet\nis recommended. This dietary approach can help to reduce\nlactate levels, but its long-term efficacy remains unclear [1].\nThiamine, a co-factor ofpyruvate dehydrogenase, is also used\nroutinely but only a minority show response to thiamine. Pa-\ntients with pyruvate dehydrogenase E1-alpha deficiency ex-\nhibit the most favorable response to thiamine [2].\n\nThe patient in this case was a 24-month-old male patient\nwith the most common pyruvate dehydrogenase E1-alpha\ndeficiency. The child can be classified as having infantile on-\nset. The child exhibited chronic lactic acidosis and psycho-\nmotor retardation. However, no structural brain anomalies\nor neurologic deficits were observed on the brain MRI. His\ndaily diet was based on formula milk and enteral nutrition\nformulas. Therefore, he was not strictly on a ketogenic diet.\nHe was treated with the maximum dose of thiamine, which\nis 1 g/day.\n\nPDHC deficiency is a type of mitochondrial disorder.\nWhen administering anesthesia to patients with mitochon-\ndrial disorders, complications such as prolonged muscle re-\nlaxation effects [5], acute respiratory failure after anesthesia\nrecovery [6], malignant hyperthermia [7], and propofol infu-\nsion syndrome [8] can be observed. Although, in our patient,\nthere were no signs of such adverse events and no abrupt\nabnormal changes in electrocardiography, capnography,\nbody temperature, and blood pressure, anesthesiologists\nshould always consider multiple factors when administering\nanesthesia to patients with PDHC deficiency.\n\nFirst, airway problems can be caused by facial dysmor-\nphism, which can be observed in patients with PDHC defi-\nciency. Such facial features include a flat wide nasal bridge,\nlong philtrum, thin upper lip, low-set ears, and a high arched\npalate [3,9]. Intubation can be difficult due to facial dysmor-\nphism [10]. Therefore, additional methods such as using a\nvideo laryngoscope can be considered. In this case, he\nshowed a wide nasal bridge and flared nostrils. However, no\nother facial deformities were observed. Thus, no airway\nproblems were identified.\n\nSecond, close attention should be paid to the acid-base\nimbalance. Precipitating factors that trigger an increase in\nlactate levels should be avoided. Sepsis, hypothermia, hy-\npoxemia, hypocarbia, and decreased cardiac output all con-\ntribute to lactate increase [4,11]. Anesthetic management\nshould be performed carefully to avoid these events and\nmake stress-free situations. If possible, arterial blood gas\n\nanalysis should be performed at regular intervals to closely\nmonitor lactic acidosis.\n\nThe selection of intraoperative intravenous fluids also\nneeds to be carefully considered. Lactate containing intrave-\nnous solutions should not be administered as the lactate\nload only increases [12]. In this case, we used a balanced\ncrystalloid solution that did not contain lactate during the\nfirst surgery, and we used 5% dextrose water for the second\nsurgery. Both fluids were helpful as they did not contribute\nto an increase in lactate levels. Furthermore, owing to a de-\ncent amount of estimated blood loss during the second sur-\ngery, we used one packed red blood cell for transfusion and\nno side effects were observed.\n\nThird, the choice of drugs for anesthesia induction and\nmaintenance is influenced by the inhibitory effect of the\ndrug-induced suppression of gluconeogenesis, which can\nexacerbate coexisting metabolic acidosis [13]. To the best of\nour knowledge, no recommendations are currently available\nfor which anesthetic agents should be used. In this case, an-\nesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane and no complica-\ntions were observed. According to previous literature, suc-\ncessful cases using sevoflurane have been observed [12,13].\nAlso, there have been two successful cases of total intrave-\nnous anesthesia using propofol and fentanyl [10], and mid-\nazolam and remifentanil [11]. Based on the reported cases\nso far, we can confirm that either method can be utilized\nwith a close monitoring. However, anesthesiologists should\nbe aware of the possibility of malignant hyperthermia when\nusing volatile agents. On the other hand, the possibility of\npropofol infusion syndrome should be considered when\npropofol is used as the primary anesthetic agent. Proper\nmonitoring such as capnography, electrocardiography, and\ncore temperature monitoring should be applied to detect\nearly signs of these events.\n\nSince there was no appropriate size of neuromuscular\nmonitoring for this patient in our hospital, it was not possi-\nble to check the neuromuscular transmission status of the\npatient. However, we had to use a neuromuscular blocking\nagent more frequently because ofmultiple episodes of spon-\ntaneous respiration. Based on this finding, it is likely that\nthere was no prolongation ofthe muscle relaxation effect.\n\nThrough this case and literature review, we confirmed that\nanesthesiologists should consider the multiple factors men-\ntioned above when anesthetizing a patient with PDHC defi-\nciency. Moreover, monitoring lactic acid levels might be a\nhelpful indicator to predict the clinical course of a patient\nwith PDHC deficiency during the perioperative period.