INTRODUCTION\n\nCaudal block is a common anesthetic option for pediatric\npatients undergoing sub-umbilical surgery. Most caudal\nblocks are performed as adjuvant procedures to general an-\nesthesia with endotracheal intubation [1], but caudal block\nwith sedation per se can be used as an alternative to general\nanesthesia [2-4]. Surgery under caudal block in conjunction\n\nwith sedation may be safe in terms of maintaining spontane-\nous breathing and avoiding complications associated with\ngeneral anesthesia. Specifically, caudal block under sedation\nhas been considered effective in high-risk patients such as\nneonates and infants. Moreover, compared to general anes-\nthesia, it has a lower likelihood of precipitating postoperative\nrespiratory events [5].\n\nSevoflurane administration via a face mask is a popular anesthetic protocol for pediatric sedation, and this technique\nis commonly used in our institution. Despite various advan-\ntages of sevoflurane sedation, including rapid onset, quick re-\ncovery, reduced airway irritation, and greater hemodynamic\nstability, emergence agitation (EA) induced by sevoflurane is\na major concern to pediatric anesthesiologists. EA is charac-\nterized by inconsolable crying, kicking, disorientation, and\ncognitive impairment, and can lead to significant problems\nsuch as the removal of drains or catheters, falling from the\nbed, and self-inflicted harm to the surgical wound [6,7].\n\nTo date, no study has investigated EA caused by different\nsedation doses of sevoflurane in conjunction with caudal\nblock. Therefore, we aimed to investigate whether sevoflu-\nrane sedation with caudal block may be an alternative an-\nesthetic technique in children undergoing inguinal hernia\nrepair and to compare the incidence ofEA in children admin-\nistered two different doses of sevoflurane.\n\n# MATERIALS AND METHODS\n\n# Study design\n\nThis study was approved by the Institutional Review Board\n(no. KNUH201606026), and informed consent was obtained\nfrom the parents of all the pediatric patients. The study was\nregistered as a clinical trial (NCT03134547). Forty-three\nchildren, aged up to 5 years, scheduled to undergo elective\nsub-umbilical surgery were enrolled. Children with devel-\nopmental delays, anxiety disorders, history of allergy to any\nstudy drugs, or severe systemic disease were excluded from\nthis study. Randomization was performed with a computer-\ngenerated schedule by using a concealed random number\ntable; each random number was sealed in an envelope. The\nchildren were randomized into either the low-dose (1.0%)\nend-tidal sevoflurane concentration group (Group LS) or the\nhigh-dose (2.5%) end-tidal sevoflurane concentration group\n(Group HS). After sedation with 2 mg/kg intravenous (IV)\nketamine and 0.05 mg/kg IV midazolam during preoperative\npreparation, the patients were transferred to the operating\nroom. Standardized monitoring (electrocardiography, pulse\noximetry, and noninvasive blood pressure monitoring) was\nimplemented, and capnography was performed via a face\nmask. Baseline vital signs were assessed with the patients in\nthe supine position; thereafter, the patients were placed in\n\nthe lateral Sims' position. With patients under 100% oxygen\nand with sevoflurane administered via the face mask accord-\ning to the study group protocol, 1 ml/kg 1% lidocaine with 5\n�g/ml epinephrine was administered into the caudal space\nby using a 22-gauge needle. During caudal block, 1 mg/kg IV\nketamine was administered for ensuring patient immobility\nif needed. All procedures were performed by one skilled an-\nesthesiologist who was blinded to the study group allocation.\nAfter caudal block was performed, the patients were returned\nto the supine position and maintained on spontaneous ven-\ntilation under 100% oxygen and sevoflurane administration\nvia the face mask according to the study group protocol to\nachieve sedation during surgery. The face mask was tightly\nre-taped at the cheek to prevent sevoflurane leakage as much\nas possible. End-tidal concentrations of sevoflurane and car-\nbon dioxide were continuously monitored during surgery. If\nthe oxygen saturation dropped below 90%, assisted ventila-\ntion was provided. The heart rate (HR) and mean blood pres-\nsure (MBP) were recorded at arrival, during the surgery (T0),\njust before caudal block (T1), just after caudal block (T2), 5\nmin after returning to the supine position (T3), 15 min after\nreturning to the supine position (T4), 5 min before the end of\nthe surgery (T5), 5 min after arrival in the post-anesthetic care\nunit (PACU) (T6), after 15 min in the PACU (T7), and after 30\nmin in the PACU (T8). If the patients moved intraoperatively,\nthey were administered IV ketamine in 1 mg/kg increments.\nIf the patients were receiving supplemental inotropic drugs\nor vasoconstrictors, the details were recorded (these drugs\nwere administered when the HR and MBP were altered by\nmore than 10% oftheir baseline values).\n\nIn the PACU, another anesthesiologist who was blinded to\nthe study protocol monitored the incidence rate of EA (pri-\nmary outcome) at T6 and T8. The EA scores (secondary out-\ncome) at T6 and T8 were assessed using a four-point agitation\nscale (possible range, 1-4) [8] and the Pediatric Anesthesia\nEmergence Delirium (PAED) scale (possible range, 0-20) [6].\nWe also recorded the distribution of scores according to each\nEA scale [9]. A diagnosis ofEA was considered when the four-\npoint agitation scale score was ≥ 3 or the PAED scale score\nwas ≥ 10 [9]. If the total score on the PAED scale was higher\nthan 15 (described as severe agitation), 0.5 mg/kg propofol\nwas administered to the patientvia an injection.\n\nwww.anesth-pain-med.org\n\nKSPA\n\n435\n\nAnesth Pain Med Vol. 14 No. 4\n\n# Statistical analysis\n\nIn this study, the primary outcome was the incidence rate\nof EA in the PACU. A power analysis to calculate the sample\nsize was performed on the basis of our preliminary records,\nby comparing both concentrations of sevoflurane with the\nincidence of EA (four-point agitation scale score ≥ 3, at 30\nmin after arrival in the PACU). A preliminary study on 20\npatients undergoing inguinal hernia surgery under caudal\nblock with low-dose (Group LS) and high-dose (Group HS)\nsevoflurane sedation showed that the incidence rate of EA in\nthe PACU was 9.1% (1/11) and 66.7% (6/9), respectively. Con-\nsidering the primary outcome of EA incidence rate in the two\nindependent groups, this analysis revealed that we needed a\nsample size of 19 patients in each group to achieve 90% pow-\ner and a 1% level of significance. Therefore, after accounting\nfor a 5% drop-out rate, we enrolled 20 patients in each group\nand a total of 40 patients into the study. The demographic\ndata were summarized using descriptive analyses, with the\nquantitative variables being expressed as means 土 standard\ndeviations and the qualitative variables being expressed as\nfrequencies and percentages. The four-point agitation score\nand PAED score between Group LS and Group HS were\ncompared using the chi-square test, and the results were\nexpressed as frequencies, percentiles, and P values. To com-\npare two population rates with independent samples, the\nrate comparison by two independent groups with Z statistics\nwas used, and the results were expressed as rate differences, 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for rate differences, and P\nvalues. Comparison ofthe changes in hemodynamic param-\neters such as the HR and MBP caused by the time, group, and\ninteraction (time difference by group) effects was performed\nusing a generalized linear model. All data were analyzed by a\nmedical statistician. Statistical analyses were performed us-\ning IBM SPSS statistics for Windows, version 23.0 (IBM Corp.,\nUSA). All the tests were two-sided, and P values less than 0.01\nwere considered statistically significant.\n\nRESULTS\n\nForty-three children underwent the screening test; caudal\nblock failed in one child, and two children declined to par-\nticipate in the study. Finally, 40 children (20 in Group HS and\n20 in Group LS) were enrolled and none ofthem dropped out\n(Fig. 1 \nAssessed for eligibility (n = 43)\nExcluded (n = 3)\nFail to caudal block (n = 1)\nDeclined to participate (n = 2)\nRandomized (n = 40)\nLow dose sevoflurane High dose sevoflurane\nLost to follow-up (n = 0) Lost to follow-up (n = 0)\nAnalysed (n = 20) Analysed (n = 20)\n\nFig. 1. Flow diagram of the study design and patient enrollment.). No significant differences were observed in the age,\nsex, height, weight, duration of surgery or anesthesia, pro-\nportion of patients who required anesthetics during caudal\nblock and surgery, and proportion of patients who required\nsupplemental ventilation intraoperatively (Table 1. Demographic Data\n\n| Variables | Group LS (n = 20) | Group HS (n = 20) |\n| --- | --- | --- |\n| Age (mo) | 25.8 土 20.6 | 34.5 土 24.6 |\n| Sex (M/F) | 17 (85)/3(15) | 15 (75)/5 (25) |\n| Height (cm) | 84.9 土 18.7 | 91.9 土 17.6 |\n| Weight (kg) | 11.7 土 4.7 | 13.3 土 5.0 |\n| Anesthetic time (min) | 67.5 土 28.4 | 64.3 土 22.1 |\n| Operation time (min) | 48.5 土 26.8 | 45.6 土 21.1 |\n| Awake time (min) | 2.6 土 2.1 | 5.9 土 2.0 |\n| Movement during caudal block | 5 (25) | 2 (10) |\n| Supplemental anesthetics (ketamine) | 5 (25) | 2 (10) |\n| Movement during surgery | 0 (0) | 0(0) |\n| Supplemental anesthetics (ketamine) | 0 (0) | 0 (0) |\n| Assisted ventilation intraoperatively | 0 (0) | 0(0) |\n| Inotropics or vasoconstrictors during surgery | 0 (0) | 0(0) |\n\n\nValues are presented as mean 土 SD, number (%), or frequency (%).\nGroup LS: low-dose (1.0%) end-tidal sevoflurane concentration group,\nGroup HS: high-dose (2.5%) end-tidal sevoflurane concentration group.). The\ndistribution of the scores between Group LS and Group HS\non the four-point agitation scale at 5 min after arrival in the\nPACU was not statistically significant (P = 0.245); however, at 30 min after arrival in the PACU, it was statistically signifi-\ncant (P = 0.001) (Table 2. Distribution of Patients according to the Four-point Agitation\nScale Scores at Two Time Points\n\n| Arrival in the PACU | Group LS (n = 20) | Group HS (n = 20) | P value |\n| --- | --- | --- | --- |\n| At 5 min |  |  | 0.245 |\n| 1 | 5 (25) | 7 (35) |  |\n| 2 | 13 (65) | 8 (40) |  |\n| 3 | 2 (10) | 5 (25) |  |\n| 4 | 0 (0) | 0(0) |  |\n| At 30 min |  |  | 0.001* |\n| 1 | 5 (25) | 0 (0) |  |\n| 2 | 15 (75) | 9 (45) |  |\n| 3 | 0 (0) | 9 (45) |  |\n| 4 | 0 (0) | 2 (10) |  |\n\n\nValues are presented as frequency (%). PACU: post-anesthetic care\nunit, Group LS: low-dose (1.0%) end-tidal sevoflurane concentration\ngroup, Group HS: high-dose (2.5%) end-tidal sevoflurane concentration\ngroup. *Statistically significant with a P value < 0.01.). The result of the comparison of the\nPAED scale scores between Group LS and Group HS at 5 min\nafter arrival in the PACU was not statistically significant (P\n= 0.022); however, at 30 min after arrival in the PACU, it was\nstatistically significant (P = 0.002) (Table 3. Distribution of Patients according to the Pediatric Anesthesia\nEmergence Delirium Scores at Two Time Points\n\n| Arrival in the PACU | Group LS (n = 20) | Group HS (n = 20) | P value |\n| --- | --- | --- | --- |\n| At 5 min |  |  | 0.022 |\n| 0-5 | 6 (30) | 11 (55) |  |\n| 6-9 | 14 (70) | 6 (30) |  |\n| 10-15 | 0 (0) | 3 (15) |  |\n| > 15 | 0 (0) | 0 (0) |  |\n| At 30 min |  |  | 0.002* |\n| 0-5 | 9 (45) | 2 (10) |  |\n| 6-9 | 11 (55) | 8 (40) |  |\n| 10-15 | 0 (0) | 8 (40) |  |\n| > 15 | 0 (0) | 2 (10) |  |\n\n\nValues are presented as frequency (%). PACU: post-anesthetic care\nunit, Group LS: low-dose (1.0%) end-tidal sevoflurane concentration\ngroup, Group HS: high-dose (2.5%) end-tidal sevoflurane concentration\ngroup. *Statistically significant with a P value < 0.01.). Regarding the\nprimary outcome, the difference in the incidence rate of EA\nbetween Group LS and Group HS on the basis of a four-point\nagitation scale score ≥ 3 at 30 min after arrival in the PACU\nwas statistically significant (rate difference, -50.0% [95% CI:\n-71.91 to -28.09%], P < 0.001). Moreover, the difference in the\nincidence rate of EA between Group LS and Group HS on the\nbasis of a PAED scale score ≥ 10 at 30 min after arrival in the\nPACU was statistically significant(rate difference, -40.0% [95% CI: -61.47 to -18.52%], P < 0.001). However, no difference was\nobserved in the incidence rate of EA at 5 min after arrival in\nthe PACU; on the four-point agitation scale and PAED scale\n(Table 4. Agitation Incidence Rate at Two Time Points during Observation in the Post-anesthetic Care Unit\n\n| Variables | Group LS (n = 20) | Group HS (n = 20) | Rate difference, % (95% CI) | P value |\n| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |\n| FPAS (≥ 3) |  |  |  |  |\n| At 5 min In the PACU | 2 (10) | 5 (25) | -15.0 (-38.09 to 8.087) | 0.101 |\n| At 30 min In the PACU | 0 (0) | 10 (50) | -50.0 (-71.91 to -28.09) | < 0.001 * |\n| PAEDS (≥ 10) |  |  |  |  |\n| At 5 min In the PACU | 0 (0) | 3 (15) | -15.0 (-30.65 to 0.65) | 0.030 |\n| At 30 min In the PACU | 0 (0) | 8 (40) | -40.0 (-61.47 to-18.52) | < 0.001 * |\n\n\nValues are presented as frequency (%). Group LS: low-dose (1.0%) end-tidal sevoflurane concentration group, Group HS: high-dose (2.5%) end-tidal\nsevoflurane concentration group, CI: confidence interval, FPAS: four-point agitation scale, PAEDS: Pediatric Anesthesia Emergence Delirium scale.\n*Statistically significant with a P value < 0.01.). Among the hemodynamic parameters, the HR and\nMBP were not statistically different between the two groups (P\n= 0.970 and P = 0.627, respectively) (Figs. 2 and 3)(- Chart Type: line\n|  | T0 | T | T2 | T3 | T4 | T5 | T6 | T7 | T8 |\n| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |\n| item_01 | 140Beats/min | 145Beats/min | 145Beats/min | 140Beats/min | 140Beats/min | 135Beats/min | 135Beats/min | 135Beats/min | 135Beats/min |\n\n\nFig. 2. Heart rate changes. Values are expressed as mean 土 SEM.\nGroup LS: low-dose (1.0%) end-tidal sevoflurane concentration group,\nGroup HS: high-dose (2.5%) end-tidal sevoflurane concentration group,\nTO: arrival at the operation room, T1: immediately before caudal block,\nT2: immediately after caudal block, T3: 5 min after returning to the\nsupine position, T4: 15 min after returning to the supine position, T5:\n5 min before the end of surgery, T6, T7, and T8: 5, 15, and 30 min,\nrespectively, after arrival in the post-anesthetic care unit.)(\n- Chart Type: line\n|  | T0 | T | T2 | T3 | T4 | T5 | T6 | T7 | T8 |\n| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |\n| item_01 | 95mmHg | 75mmHg | 60mmHg | 65mmHg | 60mmHg | 55mmHg | 55mmHg | 55mmHg | 55mmHg |\n\n\nFig. 3. Mean blood pressure changes. Values are expressed as mean\n土 SEM. Group LS: low-dose (1.0%) end-tidal sevoflurane concentration\ngroup, Group HS: high-dose (2.5%) end-tidal sevoflurane concentration\ngroup, TO: arrival at the operation room, T1: immediately before caudal\nblock, T2: immediately after caudal block, T3: 5 min after returning to\nthe supine position, T4: 15 min after returning to the supine position,\nT5: 5 min before the end of surgery, T6, T7, and T8: 5, 15, and 30 min,\nrespectively, after arrival in the post-anesthetic care unit.).\n\nDISCUSSION\n\nThis study showed that the incidence of EA was lower in\nGroup LS than in Group HS, and the combination of caudal\nblock and sevoflurane sedation via a face mask was presum-\nably adequate for performing inguinal hernia repair in chil-\ndren. It prevented inadvertent movement and helped main-tain a stable hemodynamic condition during surgery.\n\nCaudal block has been established as a practical and safe\ntechnique, with low complication rates in sub-umbilical\nsurgery on pediatric patients [5,10]. Generally, caudal block\nis performed as an adjuvant technique during general anes-\nthesia to provide postoperative analgesia. However, intra-\nvenous or inhalational sedation with caudal anesthesia has\nbeen shown to be a feasible alternative to general anesthe-\nsia in pediatric patients undergoing inguinal hernia repair\n[2-4]. Sedation with caudal block can alleviate the need for\nendotracheal intubation and may avoid subsequent postop-\nerative complications such as sore throat, hoarseness, and\ndysphasia [11,12]. In neonates and infants in particular, this\ntechnique may be more effective than general anesthesia for\nmaintaining spontaneous breathing and attenuating the risk\nof postoperative apnea and hypoxemia [13]. If sedation with\ncaudal block is used, the dose of intravenous or inhalational\nanesthetics may be decreased, and this may be beneficial in\navoiding the anesthesia-induced effects on neurodevelop-\nment. Kim et al. [14] showed that sevoflurane requirements\nwere lower with caudal block than with general anesthesia\nalone in children undergoing lower limb surgery. In a study\nby Weldon et al., the minimum alveolar concentration (MAC)\nof inhaled anesthetics was reduced by 50% during the intra-\noperative phase, after the administration ofcaudal block [15]. \n\nIn our institution, sevoflurane sedation with caudal block\nhas been the standard practice of anesthesia for inguinal her-\nnia repair and orchiopexy in pediatric patients. Various seda-\ntion protocols can be used; however, ideal sedative drugs for\npediatric patients should be easy to administer, provide pre-\ndictable and reliable sedation, and be associated with rapid\nrecovery and minimal side effects [16]. Inhalation anesthetic\nmasks are commonly used in pediatric anesthesia. Inhala-\ntional sevoflurane anesthesia, in particular, has been increas-\ningly used because it has a rapid onset, enables patients to\nrecover quickly, and causes less airway irritation than do\nthe alternatives [17]. However, sevoflurane has undesirable\neffects such as EA, which occurs in up to 80% of preschool\nchildren [7]. The pathophysiology of EA is unclear, but low\npatient age and use of volatile anesthetics with low solubility\nare major contributing factors [18,19]. Therefore, if sevoflu-\nrane is to be used for pediatric anesthesia, the incidence of\nEA has to be reduced to avoid self-injury to the patients and\ndisruption of the operative or recovery settings. Although\nvarious approaches, including the administration of agents\nsuch as opioids, ketamine, and midazolam, have been stud-\nied to achieve uneventful emergence [20-22], we intended to\ndetermine the suitable concentration of face-mask-delivered\nsevoflurane that will reduce the incidence of EA in caudal\nblock procedures.\n\n438\n\nwww.anesth-pain-med.org\n\nEmergence agitation and sevoflurane sedation\n\nIn this study, we used two agitation rating systems; four-\npoint agitation scale and PAED scale. Among the various\nanalysis tools related to EA, PAED scale is a widely used\nmethod, but eye contact item of the scale may be affected by\nthe ophthalmic nature of surgery. Therefore, we addition-\nally used a four-point agitation scale to measure EA. The\nincidence of EA using two analysis tools was higher in Group\nHS than in Group LS. The rate of EA in Group HS was com-\nparable to that reported in a previous study [7], but the rate\nin Group LS was much lower. Both sedation concentrations\nof sevoflurane with caudal block provided adequate surgical\nconditions for inguinal repair surgery, thus ensuring un-\neventful completion of the surgery, without any cardiovascu-\nlar complications, supplemental sedative requirements, and\nexcessive movements during the surgery.\n\nIn addition to low patient age and use of sevoflurane,\npreoperative anxiety is a contributing factor to EA. In this\nstudy, we did not assess the degree of preoperative anxiety.\nHowever, we administered ketamine and midazolam during\npreoperative preparation for sedation and relief in patients\nundergoing caudal block. Therefore, the influence of preop-\nerative anxiety on EA may be somewhat limited in this study.\n\nThis study has some limitations. First, although the HR,\nMBP, and movement were used for estimating the depth of\nanesthesia, we did not monitor the anesthetic depth by using\nthe bispectral index (BIS) because intraoperative sponta-\nneous ventilation might have caused variations in the BIS.\nKern et al. [23] reported wide variations in the BIS during the\nintraoperative sedation phase (2.5% end-tidal sevoflurane\nthrough a face mask with peripheral nerve block). Neverthe-\nless, further studies including BIS monitoring are needed\nfor reducing the possibility of inadvertent awareness or sub-\noptimal sedation. Second, we did not record the end-tidal\nsevoflurane concentration, even though we continuously\nchecked and adjusted the end-tidal sevoflurane concentra-\ntion during the surgery. It was assumed that if the face mask\nwas correctly applied, the end-tidal sevoflurane concentra-\ntion might be maintained in a steady-state condition. In the\nstudy by Kern et al. [23], the variability in the end-tidal sevo-\nflurane concentration inhaled through the face mask was\nlow, and this was in contrast to the wide variation in the BIS\nduring spontaneous ventilation. However, the possibility of\nan increased variation in the dosage of inhaled sevoflurane\nduring airway management using the face mask cannot\n\nbe excluded. Third, high-dose sevoflurane (2.5%) might be\nconsidered an anesthetic dose rather than a sedation dose,\neven though we selected this dose on the basis of the findings\nof another study. Fourth [23], we did not consider the value\nof adjusting the end-tidal sevoflurane concentration. Age\naffects the MAC of sevoflurane to different degrees. Future\nstudies should consider the importance of adjusting the end-\ntidal sevoflurane concentration. Fifth, we used ketamine and\nmidazolam as preoperative sedatives, as part of the standard\ncare at our institution. Ketamine and midazolam have been\nshown to decrease the incidence ofEA in some studies [24,25],\nbut other studies have reported conflicting findings [26]. Both\ndrugs might be responsible for EA; nevertheless, perform-\ning awake caudal anesthesia in the pediatric population is\nunethical. Moreover, since neither drug biased the results,\nthey were administered to all children. Finally, although EA\nscoring in the PACU was double-blinded, this study was not\ndouble-blinded intraoperatively. This might affect the cred-\nibility ofthe observed findings.\n\nIn conclusion, sevoflurane face-mask sedation with caudal\nblock may be considered an alternative anesthetic technique\nin children undergoing inguinal hernia repair, and 1.0%\nsevoflurane may be more effective than 2.5% sevoflurane in\npreventing EA.