INTRODUCTION\n\nIn elective cases, preoperative fasting is intended to pre-\nvent pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents during general\nanesthesia. The American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA)\nguidelines suggest 2/4/6 h for fasting for clear liquids, breast-\n\nmilk and light meals, respectively [1]. It is well known that\nthe fasting times are often prolonged due to organizational\nissues, communication problems, or because children do\nnot receive clear liquids up until the cutoff time for various\nreasons such as not wanting to wake the child for a drink if\nthey are scheduled early in the morning [2-5]. Prolonged fasting may lead to hypovolemia and disequilibrium of the\nmetabolic status putting the patient at risk for adverse events\nincluding arterial hypotension, difficult intravenous access,\nor hypoglycemia [6,7]. Isserman et al. [8] and Newton et al.\n[9] reported in their quality improvement studies methods\nfor optimization in timing of clear liquid fasting. Both stud-\nies used the percentage of patients having clear liquids with-\nin four hours prior to anesthesia as the improvement crite-\nria. Isserman et al. [8] showed an increase from 20 to 63%\nand Newton et al. [9] from 19 to 72% after implementing new\n\"nil-per-os\" (NPO) instructions allowing more liberal clear\nliquid fasting for one hour prior to anesthesia. This allowed\nthem to offer eligible children a drink on arrival and reduced\ntheir fasting times significantly. This step of reducing the\nfasting time for clear liquids to one hour was justified by the\ncurrent evidence showing that one hour of clear liquid fast-\ning is not associated with increased incidence of aspiration\n[10-14]. Presently, this regimen is corroborated by recently\npublished consensus statements from international anes-\nthesia societies recommending clear liquid intake up to one\nhour prior to anesthesia [15-18]. However, in the United\nStates, nationwide anesthesia departments follow the cur-\nrent ASA guidelines on clear liquid fasting of two hours prior\nto anesthesia. Hence, the Isserman et al. [8] and Newton et\nal. [9] published improvement strategies have not been\nwidely implemented. Thus, other solutions to achieve an\noptimized clear liquid fasting of two hours with the aim to\nminimize the negative effects of prolonged fasting need to\nbe described.\n\nThe aim of this retrospective quality improvement survey\nwas to evaluate the current effective clear liquid fasting\ntimes at our institution, to further investigate causes for pro-\nlonged NPO hours and to suggest options to decrease barri-\ners to adherence of current ASA guidelines.\n\n# MATERIALS AND METHODS\n\nAfter approval from the Institutional Review Board at\nStanford University School of Medicine (no. IRB-56152) all\nelectronic medical anesthesia records of the year 2019 at the\nDivision ofPediatric Anesthesia ofLucile Packard Children's\nHospital (LPCH, Stanford University School of Medicine,\nStanford, CA, USA) were reviewed. Emergent cases were ex-\ncluded for statistical analysis. All inpatients were also ex-\ncluded in the statistical analysis due to variability in NPO in-\nstructions (NPO from midnight for all liquids and solids to\nallow more flexibility for scheduling during the next day),\n\nwhich were studied and improved after a quality improve-\nment study published by Nye et al. [19] in 2018.\n\nAt our institution patients are instructed to arrive to the\nhospital at least 90 min prior to their scheduled surgical start\ntime. The NPO instructions are in accordance with the cur-\nrent ASA guidelines and are calculated based on the pa-\ntient's arrival time (see Fig. 1).\n\nTo investigate and discuss the findings ofthis retrospective\nanalysis and to further create an improvement plan, a task\nforce was founded. This task force consisted of the chief of\nthe pediatric anesthesia division (JF), a member ofthe anes-\nthesia quality improvement team (JM), the OR Medical Di-\nrector (RC), two members of the Pediatric Anesthesia Re-\nsource Center team (JM and GD) and an expert on preoper-\native fasting (ARS).\n\nThe primary outcome was to measure the effective NPO\ntime for clear liquid, defined as time from last intake of clear\nliquids to \"in room time\". Secondary outcomes were the in-\ncidence of \"in room time\" compared to scheduled start time\nand the parental compliance with the NPO instructions (de-\nfined as time between instructed and actual NPO time) for\npatients being allowed to drink clear liquid after 7 AM on\ntheir day ofsurgery.\n\nIn addition, all pediatric anesthesia attendings at LPCH\nwere asked to participate in an anonymous online survey\nto evaluate their willingness to deviate from the existing\nASA guidelines for clear liquid fasting. They were asked if\nthey would induce anesthesia (intravenous and mask, re-\nspectively) in a child that was fasted for clear liquids for 60,\n90, or 105 min.\n\nData were extracted from our electronic health record\n(EHR) system, Epic (November 2019 version, Epic Systems,\nInc., USA) to Excel (Microsoft Excel, edition 2016, Microsoft\nCorp., USA) and compiled in SPSS (IBM SPSS statistics, ver-\nsion 23, IBM Co., USA) for statistical analysis. Data are pres-\nents as median (interquartile range; minimum-maximum)\nor count and percent were appropriate. Times are displayed\nas hh:mm (e.g., 1:46 h = 1 h and 46 min).\n\nA first screening of the data showed very few cases with\nNPO times under 2 h (n = 88) and some cases with NPO\ntimes over 18:00 h (n = 148). This data was validated inde-\npendently by two authors (ARS and JM). If both reviewers\nfound an error with documentation (e.g., last time for clear\nfluid intake documented as PM instead of AM), the case was\nexcluded for further analysis. Otherwise, all other cases were\nincluded for analysis.\n\nwww.anesth-pain-med.org\n\n267\n\nKSPA\n\nAnesth Pain Med Vol. 16 No. 3\n\nStanford\nChildren's Health\n\nLucile Packard\nChildren's Hospital\nStanford\n\n# NPO - No Eating or Drinking Guidelines\nBefore Surgery\n\n# www.starforchildnes.orgianichicvilitinpos-dolines\n\nOur general NPO (no eating or drinking) instructions are listed below. These are enforced to keep your child as safe as\npossible. Ifthese guidelines are not followed, your child's procedure or surgery may be delayed or cancelled. A small number\nof children will receive special guidelines that differ from these. Follow the instructions given by your anesthesia provider.\n\n- 1. Stop food and candy at midnight. Food includes anything that's not formula, milk, breast milk or clear liquids.\n- 2. Stop formula and milk 6 hours prior to arrival time.\n- 3. Stop breast milk 4 hours prior to arrival time.\n- 4. Stop all clear liquids 2 hours priorto arrival time. Clear liquids include only water, clear apple juice (no pulp, no apple\n- cider), Pedialyte and Gatorade.\nTIME NIGHT BEFORE SURGERY\n12:00 AM\nSTOP all food and candy\nMIDNIGHT\nBEFORE ARRIVAL TIME\nTIME\n6 STOP formula and milk\nHOURS\nTIME\n4 STOP breast milk\nHOURS\nTIME\n2 STOP all clear liquids\nHOURS\nARRIVAL TIME\nDay\nArrival\n� Date\n우수\n합동 Stanford MEDICINE Please recycle. 2469 |07/16\n\nFig. 1. Displayed is the current nil-per-os (NPO) instruction for our patients based on arrival time. The written text includes the statement\nthe case might be \"delayed or cancelled\" if the instructions are not followed. NPO for food and candy is always from midnight.\n\n268\n\nwww.anesth-pain-med.org\n\nHow to improve fasting times\n\n# RESULTS\n\n# NPO data\n\nA total of 12,623 anesthesia records were extracted from\nour EHR. From these 540 emergent cases and 2,347 inpa-\ntients were excluded prior to analysis. After data validation,\n48 cases with NPO times under two hours and 63 cases\nover 18 h were excluded. Of the remaining 9,625 cases,\n6,841 (71.1%) were ambulatory patients and 2,784 (28.9%)\nwere outpatients admitted postoperatively. Patients' mean\nage was 8.3 years (10.3; 0.0-68.7) and ASA classifications\nwere as follows: 2,146 (22.3%) ASA-1, 3,929 (40.8%) ASA-2,\n3,427 (35.6%) ASA-3, 119 (1.2%) ASA-4 and four missing\nASA documentations.\n\nArrival time to hospital was documented in 9,054 cases\n(94.1%) and the mean time from arrival to the hospital un-\ntil effective \"in room time\" was 1:46 h (1:01; 0:14-15:57 h),\nwith 5.1% of the patients being in the OR less than one\nhour after arrival and 60.4% being in the OR less than two\nhours after arrival.\n\nData for the primary outcome \"effective NPO time for\nclear liquids\" were documented in 6,940 cases (72.1%). The\nmedian effective NPO was 7:13 h (7:36; 1:36-23:38 h). For\n7,067 patients (73.4%) the instructed NPO times were doc-\numented with a median of 3:20 h (0:05; 2:00-23:55 h). In\n7,014 (72.8%) cases the scheduled \"in room time\" was doc-\numented, 2,075 (29.5%) were in the operating room (OR)\nearlier than scheduled with a median time earlier of 0:10 h\n(0:21; 0:01-4:37 h) and 4,939 (70.5%) were in the OR later\nthan scheduled with a median time of 0:29 h (0:54; 0:00-\n11:06 h).\n\nThe number of patients allowed to drink clear liquids after\n7 AM until their instructed NPO time was 3,084 patients. The\nmedian instructed NPO time for clear liquids was 3:20 h\n(0:10; 2:00-23:55 h) and the median effective NPO time was\n5:14 h (7:39; 1:43-23:38 h). Parental NPO compliance (as de-\nfined in the methods section) was calculated and showed a\nmedian deviation of clear liquid intake of 0:55 h (8:30; 0:00-\n18:30 h). A detailed analysis revealed 42% of patients drank\nclear liquids within 0:30 h prior to the instructed NPO time,\n53.7% within 1:00 h prior and 64.3% within 2:00 h prior. Over\n30% of the patients allowed to drink clear liquids after 7 AM\non the day of surgery had an NPO time for clear liquids lon-\nger than 4:00 h.\n\nOnline survey\n\nThe response rate for the anonymous online survey was\n43.9% (25 out of 57 pediatric anesthesia attendings). The\nmajority of anesthesiologists were willing to induce anesthe-\nsia via mask (72%) in children who were NPO for clear liq-\nuids for atleast 105 min and intravenously (84%) ifthey were\nNPO for clear liquids for at least 90 min.\n\nBased on the fact that the majority of attendings would be\nwilling to induce anesthesia (both intravenous and mask) 15\nmin earlier than the recommended ASA 2:00 h (120-105 min\n= 15 min) and the assumption that in most cases the time\nfrom \"in room\" until anesthesia induction is about 10 min,\ndetailed frequencies of earlier \"in room time\" were investi-\ngated. Of the total of 2,075 (29.5%) cases in the OR earlier\nthan scheduled, 58% are less than 15 min earlier in the OR,\n74.7% less than 25 min earlier and 3.5% more than one hour\nearlier. Based on this data, a change of NPO instructions to\n\"2:00 h prior to the scheduled in room time\" may result in a\ndelayed start time in 5.4% of all our annual cases (518 cases\nper year or two cases per day).\n\nDISCUSSION\n\nThis retrospective quality improvement survey investigated\nthe fasting times for clear liquids at a tertiary children's hospi-\ntal and the causes for prolonged fasting times. The main find-\nings were that the median effective NPO time for clear liquids\nis excessively prolonged, only a minority of patients come in\nthe OR earlier than scheduled and a majority of patients do\nnot drink clear liquids up to the time they are allowed.\n\nSimilar studies in the past have shown prolonged fasting\ntimes for clear liquids with similar results to our study [2-5].\nProlonged fasting of clear liquids has been associated with\ndistress for the patient and the parents [20], a higherincidence\nof irritability and thirst in the pediatric population [21], in-\ncreased risk of hypotension during anesthesia induction, and\na catabolic state [7]. Therefore, every effort should be under-\ntaken to reduce prolonged fasting times for clear liquids.\n\nThe present study helped identify various causes for pro-\nlonged fasting for clear liquids. First, the NPO instruction are\nbased on arrival time and thus cause a median lengthening in\nNPO times for clear liquids by 1:20 h. The present study re-\nvealed that the majority of cases start with a delay and there-\nfore, this additional time buffer is not justified. As a first step,\nwe strongly recommend NPO instructions based on the\nscheduled \"in room time\" and not on the instructed hospital arrival time. Opponents might argue with the possibility of\ncausing a delay for patients with an earlier than scheduled \"in\nroom time\". This argument can be refuted by the following\ntwo reasons. First, the incidence of a possible delay for pa-\ntients going to the OR earlier than scheduled in this study was\nlow (5.4%). Second and more importantly, is the fact that the\ntheoretical delay is based on the hypothesis that all patients\nhave a fasting time of two hours for clear liquids. Based on the\ndata of this study this will rarely be the case. Even Isserman et\nal. [8] and Newton et al. [9] still reported mean fasting times\naround six and three hours respectively after implementation\nof their new NPO instructions of only one hour for clear liq-\nuids. Both these quality improvement studies suggested a\nmore progressive regime allowing intake of clear liquids upon\nhospital arrival [8,9]. Unfortunately, the findings of the pres-\nent study with 5.1% of patients in the OR less than one hour\nafter arrival and 60.4% in OR less than two hours show that al-\nlowing liquid intake upon arrival may result in delays at our\ninstitution, since we follow the current ASA guidelines recom-\nmending two hours for clear liquid fasting.\n\nNPO compliance for patients instructed to drink after 7\nAM must be improved. Only 53.7% patients drank clear liq-\nuids within 60 min prior to the instructed NPO time and\nover 30% of the patients had a NPO time for clear liquids\nlonger than 4 h. This is in accordance with findings from\nBest et al. [22] showing that patients often choose to fast lon-\nger than instructed. One reason for this, at our institution, is\nthe wording of our NPO instructions stating that \"If these\nguidelines are not followed, your child's procedure or sur-\ngery might be delayed or cancelled\" (see Fig. 1). The use of\npunative statements in NPO instructions should be avoided.\nThus, we recommend changing our NPO instructions to en-\ncourage or even advocate for the intake of clear liquids at the\ninstructed time. Highlighting the benefits of clear liquid in-\ntake (less thirst and anxiety, better behavior and more com-\nfort [20,23-25]) to the parents will support their NPO com-\npliance. This cultural change of encouragement for NPO in-\nstructions was previously suggested by other quality im-\nprovement studies [8,9]. Fig. 2 shows an example of an en-\ncouraging NPO instructions suggested by the task force for\nimplementation at our institution.\n\nFinally, the anonymous online survey revealed that about\n50% of the anesthesia attendings would not perform a mask\ninduction on patients who fasted \"only\" one hour for clear liq-\nuids. This practice is in compliance with the current ASA\nguidelines recommending an NPO time oftwo hours for clear\nliquids. Recently published studies showed that one hour of\n\nPlease Check-in at at the front desk of LPCH\n\nINSTRUCTIONS FOR FOOD & LIQUID INTAKE\n\nYour child will need to be fastened prior to anesthesia. This is\nnecessary so that your child's stomach is empty and to prevent\nfrom serious safety risks. But it is also important that your child\ndoes not suffer from hunger and thirst. Therefore, please try to\ngive your child something to eat and drink at the times given\nbelow. Giving your child something at this time will still be safe.\n\nFOOD / NON-CLEARS\nat\n\nPlease note the time you were\ninstructed during the PARC phone call\n\nAllowed are: \nBREAST MILK\nat\nPlease note the time you were\ninstructed during the PARC phone call\n\ntoast with jam, cornflakes with\nmilk, orange juice, chocolate\nmilk, formula milk.\nCLEAR FLUIDS\nat\nPlease note the time you were\ninstructed during the PARC phone call\n\nAllowed are:\nWater, Gatorade, PediLyte, tea\nwith no milk, clear apple juice.\n\nFig. 2. Displayed is an example of a more appropriate nil-per-\nOS (NPO) instruction encouraging parents to give their child\nclear liquids. NPO times are calculated based on the scheduled\nanesthesia start time. LPCH: Lucile Packard Children's Hospital.\n\nclear liquid fasting is safe [10-14] and have led to publication\nof several consensus statements by international anesthesia\nsocieties recommending clear liquid intake up to one hour\nprior to anesthesia [15-18]. This dichotomy requires an insti-\ntutional investigation regarding providers' biases with regard\nto more liberal liquid fasting. We suggest initiating an anony-\nmous survey to achieve a departmental consensus agreement\nand to publish a standard operating procedure. This will allow\nguidance for all anesthesiology providers.\n\nThis study has several limitations that need to be ad-\ndressed. This is a retrospective study from a single center.\nOther centers might have different NPO instructions and re-\nsulting NPO times. Also, at our institution, consecutive cases\ndo not have concurrent anesthesia times. Other institutions\nmay have the ability to induce the next patient in a separate\ninduction room and therefore may need to add additional\nNPO buffer time to prevent delays. Some of these patients\nwith excessive NPO times may have been placed on intrave-\nnous maintenance fluids and therefore, should have been\nexcluded from analysis. The causes for a delayed start (pa-tient not ready, anesthesia or surgical delays) were not in-\nvestigated in detail and also case cancellations for NPO vio-\nlations were not investigated. Finally, a possible improve-\nment of clear liquid fasting times with the changes could not\nreported as these changes are recent. Both Isserman et al. [8]\nand Newton et al. [9] reported a period of over 2 years until\nimprovement was seen. Hence, we thought it important to\npresent the results of our study as it could have implications\nfor other institutions.\n\nBased on the findings of this retrospective quality im-\nprovement survey the task force highly recommends the fol-\nlowing change in practice at LPCH:\n\n- 1. Allowing patients to drink clear liquids calculated on the\n- scheduled \"in room time\".\n- 2. Parents should be advised to give their child something to\n- drink at the instructed time even if they have to wake up\n- their child.\n- 3. Based on the evidence that one-hour clear liquid fasting is\n- safe, attempt to minimize delay anesthesia induction in\n- cases when the NPO time for clear liquid fasting is \"only\"\n- 105 min.\n- How to implement in daily clinical routine:\n- 1. Use readily available anesthesia diet orders in the electronic\n- medical record for placing the NPO orders. This will in-\n- crease adherence and cause less calculation mistakes.\n- 2. With regards to the NPO instructions, we use clear ver-\n- biage on our internet website, as well as on the paperwork\n- handed out to families during the pre-anesthesia visit. Itis\n- of great importance to go through these instructions in\n- detail with the family and actively encourage them to give\n- fluids up to the allowed time.\n- 3. For patients unable to tolerate prolonged NPO times (e.g.,\n- neonates), these cases should be scheduled as first case in\n- the morning to minimize the risk of delayed case start.\n- 4. Investigation of cases with a high incidence of taking lon-\n- ger than scheduled. This will allow more accurate sched-\n- uling for the future and decrease the risk of delays for the\n- cases to follow.\n- In conclusion, we identified three factors that cause pro-\n\n\nlonged fasting times at our institution. Since prolonged fast-\ning can be associated with hypovolemia and disequilibrium\nof the metabolic status and thus, puts patients at risk for ad-\nverse events including arterial hypotension, difficult intrave-\nnous access, or hypoglycemia every effort should be at-\ntempted to minimize prolonged fasting times. Our results\nhave led us to the conclusion that our NPO times should be\nbased on the scheduled \"in room time\", that we should use\n\nencouraging instead of punitive language for NPO instruc-\ntions and that anesthesia staff should not delay anesthesia\ninduction if the fasting time for clear fluids is close to 2 h.\nEach institution should review their performance on fasting\ntimes and identify areas ofimprovement.